  Critias heard me say this, and saw that I was in a difficulty; and
as one person when another yawns in his presence catches the infection
of yawning from him, so did he seem to be driven into a difficulty
by my difficulty. But as he had a reputation to maintain, he was
ashamed to admit before the company that he could not answer my
challenge or determine the question at issue; and he made an
unintelligible attempt to hide his perplexity. In order that the
argument might proceed, I said to him, Well then Critias, if you like,
let us assume that there is this science of science; whether the
assumption is right or wrong may hereafter be investigated.
Admitting the existence of it, will you tell me how such a science
enables us to distinguish what we know or do not know, which, as we
were saying, is self-knowledge or wisdom: so we were saying?

  Yes, Socrates, he said; and that I think is certainly true: for he
who has this science or knowledge which knows itself will become
like the knowledge which he has, in the same way that he who has
swiftness will be swift, and he who has beauty will be beautiful,
and he who has knowledge will know. In the same way he who has that
knowledge which is self-knowing, will know himself.

  I do not doubt, I said, that a man will know himself, when he
possesses that which has self-knowledge: but what necessity is there
that, having this, he should know what he knows and what he does not
know?

  Because, Socrates, they are the same.

  Very likely, I said; but I remain as stupid as ever; for still I
fail to comprehend how this knowing what you know and do not know is
the same as the knowledge of self.

  What do you mean? he said.

  This is what I mean, I replied: I will admit that there is a science
of science;-can this do more than determine that of two things one
is and the other is not science or knowledge?

  No, just that.

  But is knowledge or want of knowledge of health the same as
knowledge or want of knowledge of justice?

  Certainly not.

  The one is medicine, and the other is politics; whereas that of
which we are speaking is knowledge pure and simple.

  Very true.

  And if a man knows only, and has only knowledge of knowledge, and
has no further knowledge of health and justice, the probability is
that he will only know that he knows something, and has a certain
knowledge, whether concerning himself or other men.

  True.

  Then how will this knowledge or science teach him to know what he
knows? Say that he knows health;-not wisdom or temperance, but the art
of medicine has taught it to him; and he has learned harmony from
the art of music, and building from the art of building, neither, from
wisdom or temperance: and the same of other things.

  That is evident.

  How will wisdom, regarded only as a knowledge of knowledge or
science of science, ever teach him that he knows health, or that he
knows building?

  It is impossible.

  Then he who is ignorant of these things will only know that he
knows, but not what he knows?

  True.

  Then wisdom or being wise appears to be not the knowledge of the
things which we do or do not know, but only the knowledge that we know
or do not know?

  That is the inference.

  Then he who has this knowledge will not be able to examine whether a
pretender knows or does not know that which he says that he knows:
he will only know that he has a knowledge of some kind; but wisdom
will not show him of what the knowledge is?

  Plainly not.

  Neither will he be able to distinguish the pretender in medicine
from the true physician, nor between any other true and false
professor of knowledge. Let us consider the matter in this way: If the
wise man or any other man wants to distinguish the true physician from
the false, how will he proceed? He will not talk to him about
medicine; and that, as we were saying, is the only thing which the
physician understands.

  True.

  And, on the other hand, the physician knows nothing of science,
for this has been assumed to be the province of wisdom.

  True.

  And further, since medicine is science, we must infer that he does
not know anything of medicine.

  Exactly.

  Then the wise man may indeed know that the physician has some kind
of science or knowledge; but when he wants to discover the nature of
this he will ask, What is the subject-matter? For the several sciences
are distinguished not by the mere fact that they are sciences, but
by the nature of their subjects. Is not that true?

  Quite true.

  And medicine is distinguished from other sciences as having the
subject-matter of health and disease?

  Yes.

  And he who would enquire into the nature of medicine must pursue the
enquiry into health and disease, and not into what is extraneous?

  True.

  And he who judges rightly will judge of the physician as a physician
in what relates to these?

  He will.

  He will consider whether what he says is true, and whether what he
does is right, in relation to health and disease?

  He will.

  But can any one attain the knowledge of either unless he have a of
medicine?

  He cannot.

  No one at all, it would seem, except the physician can have this
knowledge; and therefore not the wise man; he would have to be a
physician as well as a wise man.

  Very true.

  Then, assuredly, wisdom or temperance, if only a science of science,
and of the absence of science or knowledge, will not be able to
distinguish the physician who knows from one who does not know but
pretends or thinks that he knows, or any other professor of anything
at all; like any other artist, he will only know his fellow in art
or wisdom, and no one else.

  That is evident, he said.

  But then what profit, Critias, I said, is there any longer in wisdom
or temperance which yet remains, if this is wisdom? If, indeed, as
we were supposing at first, the wise man had been able to
distinguish what he knew and did not know, and that he knew the one
and did not know the other, and to recognize a similar faculty of
discernment in others, there would certainly have been a great
advantage in being wise; for then we should never have made a mistake,
but have passed through life the unerring guides of ourselves and of
those who are under us; and we should not have attempted to do what we
did not know, but we should have found out those who knew, and have
handed the business over to them and trusted in them; nor should we
have allowed those who were under us to do anything which they were
not likely to do well and they would be likely to do well just that of
which they had knowledge; and the house or state which was ordered
or administered under the guidance of wisdom, and everything else of
which wisdom was the lord, would have been well ordered; for truth
guiding, and error having been eliminated, in all their doings, men
would have done well, and would have been happy. Was not this,
Critias, what we spoke of as the great advantage of wisdom to know
what is known and what is unknown to us?

  Very true, he said.

  And now you perceive, I said, that no such science is to be found
anywhere.

  I perceive, he said.

  May we assume then, I said, that wisdom, viewed in this new light
merely as a knowledge of knowledge and ignorance, has this
advantage:-that he who possesses such knowledge will more easily learn
anything which he learns; and that everything will be clearer to
him, because, in addition to the knowledge of individuals, he sees the
science, and this also will better enable him to test the knowledge
which others have of what he knows himself; whereas the enquirer who
is without this knowledge may be supposed to have a feebler and weaker
insight? Are not these, my friend, the real advantages which are to be
gained from wisdom? And are not we looking and seeking after something
more than is to be found in her?

  That is very likely, he said.

  That is very likely, I said; and very likely, too, we have been
enquiring to no purpose; as I am led to infer, because I observe
that if this is wisdom, some strange consequences would follow. Let
us, if you please, assume the possibility of this science of sciences,
and further admit and allow, as was originally suggested, that
wisdom is the knowledge of what we know and do not know. Assuming
all this, still, upon further consideration, I am doubtful, Critias,
whether wisdom, such as this, would do us much good. For we were
wrong, I think, in supposing, as we were saying just now, that such
wisdom ordering the government of house or state would be a great
benefit.

  How so? he said.

  Why, I said, we were far too ready to admit the great benefits which
mankind would obtain from their severally doing the things which
they knew, and committing the things of which they are ignorant to
those who were better acquainted with them.

  Were we not right in making that admission?

  I think not.

  How very strange, Socrates!

  By the dog of Egypt, I said, there I agree with you; and I was
thinking as much just now when I said that strange consequences
would follow, and that I was afraid we were on the wrong track; for
however ready we may be to admit that this is wisdom, I certainly
cannot make out what good this sort of thing does to us.

  What do you mean? he said; I wish that you could make me
understand what you mean.

  I dare say that what I am saying is nonsense, I replied; and yet
if a man has any feeling of what is due to himself, he cannot let
the thought which comes into his mind pass away unheeded and
unexamined.

  I like that, he said.

  Hear, then, I said, my own dream; whether coming through the horn or
the ivory gate, I cannot tell. The dream is this: Let us suppose
that wisdom is such as we are now defining, and that she has
absolute sway over us; then each action will be done according to
the arts or sciences, and no one professing to be a pilot when he is
not, or any physician or general, or any one else pretending to know
matters of which he is ignorant, will deceive or elude us; our
health will be improved; our safety at sea, and also in battle, will
be assured; our coats and shoes, and all other instruments and
implements will be skilfully made, because the workmen will be good
and true. Aye, and if you please, you may suppose that prophecy, which
is the knowledge of the future, will be under the control of wisdom,
and that she will deter deceivers and set up the true prophets in
their place as the revealers of the future. Now I quite agree that
mankind, thus provided, would live and act according to knowledge, for
wisdom would watch and prevent ignorance from intruding on us. But
whether by acting according to knowledge we shall act well and be
happy, my dear Critias,-this is a point which we have not yet been
able to determine.

  Yet I think, he replied, that if you discard knowledge, you will
hardly find the crown of happiness in anything else.

  But of what is this knowledge? I said. Just answer me that small
question. Do you mean a knowledge of shoemaking?

  God forbid.

  Or of working in brass?

  Certainly not.

  Or in wool, or wood, or anything of that sort?

  No, I do not.

  Then, I said, we are giving up the doctrine that he who lives
according to knowledge is happy, for these live according to
knowledge, and yet they are not allowed by you to be happy; but I
think that you mean to confine happiness to particular individuals who
live according to knowledge, such for example as the prophet, who,
as I was saying, knows the future. Is it of him you are speaking or of
some one else?

  Yes, I mean him, but there are others as well.

  Yes, I said, some one who knows the past and present as well as
the future, and is ignorant of nothing. Let us suppose that there is
such a person, and if there is, you will allow that he is the most
knowing of all living men.

  Certainly he is.

  Yet I should like to know one thing more: which of the different
kinds of knowledge makes him happy? or do all equally make him happy?

  Not all equally, he replied.

  But which most tends to make him happy? the knowledge of what
past, present, or future thing? May I infer this to be the knowledge
of the game of draughts?

  Nonsense about the game of draughts.

  Or of computation?

  No.

  Or of health?

  That is nearer the truth, he said.

  And that knowledge which is nearest of all, I said, is the knowledge
of what?

  The knowledge with which he discerns good and evil.

  Monster! I said; you have been carrying me round in a circle, and
all this time hiding from me the fact that the life according to
knowledge is not that which makes men act rightly and be happy, not
even if knowledge include all the sciences, but one science only, that
of good and evil. For, let me ask you, Critias, whether, if you take
away this, medicine will not equally give health, and shoemaking
equally produce shoes, and the art of the weaver clothes?-whether
the art of the pilot will not equally save our lives at sea, and the
art of the general in war?

  Quite so.

  And yet, my dear Critias, none of these things will be well or
beneficially done, if the science of the good be wanting.

  True.

  But that science is not wisdom or temperance, but a science of human
advantage; not a science of other sciences, or of ignorance, but of
good and evil: and if this be of use, then wisdom or temperance will
not be of use.

  And why, he replied, will not wisdom be of use? For, however much we
assume that wisdom is a science of sciences, and has a sway over other
sciences, surely she will have this particular science of the good
under her control, and in this way will benefit us.

  And will wisdom give health? I said; is not this rather the effect
of medicine? Or does wisdom do the work any of the other arts, do they
not each of them do their own work? Have we not long ago asseverated
that wisdom is only the knowledge of knowledge and of ignorance, and
of nothing else?

  That is obvious.

  Then wisdom will not be the producer of health.

  Certainly not.

  The art of health is different.

  Yes, different.

  Nor does wisdom give advantage, my good friend; for that again we
have just now been attributing to another art.

  Very true.

  How then can wisdom be advantageous, when giving no advantage?

  That, Socrates, is certainly inconceivable.

  You see then, Critias, that I was not far wrong in fearing that I
could have no sound notion about wisdom; I was quite right in
depreciating myself; for that which is admitted to be the best of
all things would never have seemed to us useless, if I had been good
for anything at an enquiry. But now I have been utterly defeated,
and have failed to discover what that is to which the imposer of names
gave this name of temperance or wisdom. And yet many more admissions
were made by us than could be fairly granted; for we admitted that
there was a science of science, although the argument said No, and
protested against us; and we admitted further, that this science
knew the works of the other sciences (although this too was denied
by the argument), because we wanted to show that the wise man had
knowledge of what he knew and did not know; also we nobly disregarded,
and never even considered, the impossibility of a man knowing in a
sort of way that which he does not know at all; for our assumption
was, that he knows that which he does not know; than which nothing, as
I think, can be more irrational. And yet, after finding us so easy and
good-natured, the enquiry is still unable to discover the truth; but
mocks us to a degree, and has gone out of its way to prove the
inutility of that which we admitted only by a sort of supposition
and fiction to be the true definition of temperance or wisdom: which
result, as far as I am concerned, is not so much to be lamented, I
said. But for your sake, Charmides, I am very sorry-that you, having
such beauty and such wisdom and temperance of soul, should have no
profit or good in life from your wisdom and temperance. And still more
am I grieved about the charm which I learned with so much pain, and to
so little profit, from the Thracian, for the sake of a thing which
is nothing worth. I think indeed that there is a mistake, and that I
must be a bad enquirer, for wisdom or temperance I believe to be
really a great good; and happy are you, Charmides, if you certainly
possess it. Wherefore examine yourself, and see whether you have
this gift and can do without the charm; for if you can, I would rather
advise you to regard me simply as a fool who is never able to reason
out anything; and to rest assured that the more wise and temperate you
are, the happier you will be.

  Charmides said: I am sure that I do not know, Socrates, whether I
have or have not this gift of wisdom and temperance; for how can I
know whether I have a thing, of which even you and Critias are, as you
say, unable to discover the nature?-(not that I believe you.) And
further, I am sure, Socrates, that I do need the charm, and as far
as I am concerned, I shall be willing to be charmed by you daily,
until you say that I have had enough.

  Very good, Charmides, said Critias; if you do this I shall have a
proof of your temperance, that is, if you allow yourself to be charmed
by Socrates, and never desert him at all.

  You may depend on my following and not deserting him, said
Charmides: if you who are my guardian command me, I should be very
wrong not to obey you.

  And I do command you, he said.

  Then I will do as you say, and begin this very day.

  You sirs, I said, what are you conspiring about?

  We are not conspiring, said Charmides, we have conspired already.

  And are you about to use violence, without even going through the
forms of justice?

  Yes, I shall use violence, he replied, since he orders me; and
therefore you had better consider well.

  But the time for consideration has passed, I said, when violence
is employed; and you, when you are determined on anything, and in
the mood of violence, are irresistible.

  Do not you resist me then, he said.

  I will not resist you, I replied.

                             -THE END-



  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: SOCRATES, HERMOGENES, CRATYLUS

  Hermogenes. Suppose that we make Socrates a party to the argument?

  Cratylus. If you please.

  Her. I should explain to you, Socrates, that our friend Cratylus has
been arguing about names; he says that they are natural and not
conventional; not a portion of the human voice which men agree to use;
but that there is a truth or correctness in them, which is the same
for Hellenes as for barbarians. Whereupon I ask him, whether his own
name of Cratylus is a true name or not, and he answers "Yes." And
Socrates? "Yes." Then every man's name, as I tell him, is that which
he is called. To this he replies- "If all the world were to call you
Hermogenes, that would not be your name." And when I am anxious to
have a further explanation he is ironical and mysterious, and seems to
imply that he has a notion of his own about the matter, if he would
only tell, and could entirely convince me, if he chose to be
intelligible. Tell me, Socrates, what this oracle means; or rather
tell me, if you will be so good, what is your own view of the truth or
correctness of names, which I would far sooner hear.

  Socrates. Son of Hipponicus, there is an ancient saying, that
"hard is the knowledge of the good." And the knowledge of names is a
great part of knowledge. If I had not been poor, I might have heard
the fifty-drachma course of the great Prodicus, which is a complete
education in grammar and language- these are his own words- and then I
should have been at once able to answer your question about the
correctness of names. But, indeed, I have only heard the
single-drachma course, and therefore, I do not know the truth about
such matters; I will, however, gladly assist you and Cratylus in the
investigation of them. When he declares that your name is not really
Hermogenes, I suspect that he is only making fun of you;- he means
to say that you are no true son of Hermes, because you are always
looking after a fortune and never in luck. But, as I was saying, there
is a good deal of difficulty in this sort of knowledge, and
therefore we had better leave the question open until we have heard
both sides.

  Her. I have often talked over this matter, both with Cratylus and
others, and cannot convince myself that there is any principle of
correctness in names other than convention and agreement; any name
which you give, in my opinion, is the right one, and if you change
that and give another, the new name is as correct as the old- we
frequently change the names of our slaves, and the newly-imposed
name is as good as the old: for there is no name given to anything
by nature; all is convention and habit of the users;- such is my view.
But if I am mistaken I shall be happy to hear and learn of Cratylus,
or of any one else.

  Soc. I dare say that you be right, Hermogenes: let us see;- Your
meaning is, that the name of each thing is only that which anybody
agrees to call it?

  Her. That is my notion.

  Soc. Whether the giver of the name be an individual or a city?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. Well, now, let me take an instance;- suppose that I call a
man a horse or a horse a man, you mean to say that a man will be
rightly called a horse by me individually, and rightly called a man by
the rest of the world; and a horse again would be rightly called a man
by me and a horse by the world:- that is your meaning?

  Her. He would, according to my view.

  Soc. But how about truth, then? you would acknowledge that there
is in words a true and a false?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. And there are true and false propositions?

  Her. To be sure.

  Soc. And a true proposition says that which is, and a false
proposition says that which is not?

  Her. Yes; what other answer is possible?

  Soc. Then in a proposition there is a true and false?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. But is a proposition true as a whole only, and are the parts
untrue?

  Her. No; the parts are true as well as the whole.

  Soc. Would you say the large parts and not the smaller ones, or
every part?

  Her. I should say that every part is true.

  Soc. Is a proposition resolvable into any part smaller than a name?

  Her. No; that is the smallest.

  Soc. Then the name is a part of the true proposition?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. Yes, and a true part, as you say.

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And is not the part of a falsehood also a falsehood?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. Then, if propositions may be true and false, names may be
true and false?

  Her. So we must infer.

  Soc. And the name of anything is that which any one affirms to be
the name?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And will there be so many names of each thing as everybody says
that there are? and will they be true names at the time of uttering
them?

  Her. Yes, Socrates, I can conceive no correctness of names other
than this; you give one name, and I another; and in different cities
and countries there are different names for the same things;
Hellenes differ from barbarians in their use of names, and the several
Hellenic tribes from one another.

  Soc. But would you say, Hermogenes, that the things differ as the
names differ? and are they relative to individuals, as Protagoras
tells us? For he says that man is the measure of all things, and
that things are to me as they appear to me, and that they are to you
as they appear to you. Do you agree with him, or would you say that
things have a permanent essence of their own?

  Her. There have been times, Socrates, when I have been driven in
my perplexity to take refuge with Protagoras; not that I agree with
him at all.

  Soc. What! have you ever been driven to admit that there was no such
thing as a bad man?

  Her. No, indeed; but I have often had reason to think that there are
very bad men, and a good many of them.

  Soc. Well, and have you ever found any very good ones?

  Her. Not many.

  Soc. Still you have found them?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And would you hold that the very good were the very wise, and
the very evil very foolish? Would that be your view?

  Her. It would.

  Soc. But if Protagoras is right, and the truth is that things are as
they appear to any one, how can some of us be wise and some of us
foolish?

  Her. Impossible.

  Soc. And if, on the other hand, wisdom and folly are really
distinguishable, you will allow, I think, that the assertion of
Protagoras can hardly be correct. For if what appears to each man is
true to him, one man cannot in reality be wiser than another.

  Her. He cannot.

  Soc. Nor will you be disposed to say with Euthydemus, that all
things equally belong to all men at the same moment and always; for
neither on his view can there be some good and other bad, if virtue
and vice are always equally to be attributed to all.

  Her. There cannot.

  Soc. But if neither is right, and things are not relative to
individuals, and all things do not equally belong to all at the same
moment and always, they must be supposed to have their own proper
and permanent essence: they are not in relation to us, or influenced
by us, fluctuating according to our fancy, but they are independent,
and maintain to their own essence the relation prescribed by nature.

  Her. I think, Socrates, that you have said the truth.

  Soc. Does what I am saying apply only to the things themselves, or
equally to the actions which proceed from them? Are not actions also a
class of being?

  Her. Yes, the actions are real as well as the things.

  Soc. Then the actions also are done according to their proper
nature, and not according to our opinion of them? In cutting, for
example, we do not cut as we please, and with any chance instrument;
but we cut with the proper instrument only, and according to the
natural process of cutting; and the natural process is right and
will succeed, but any other will fail and be of no use at all.

  Her. I should say that the natural way is the right way.

  Soc. Again, in burning, not every way is the right way; but the
right way is the natural way, and the right instrument the natural
instrument.

  Her. True.

  Soc. And this holds good of all actions?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And speech is a kind of action?

  Her. True.

  Soc. And will a man speak correctly who speaks as he pleases? Will
not the successful speaker rather be he who speaks in the natural
way of speaking, and as things ought to be spoken, and with the
natural instrument? Any other mode of speaking will result in error
and failure.

  Her. I quite agree with you.

  Soc. And is not naming a part of speaking? for in giving names men
speak.

  Her. That is true.

  Soc. And if speaking is a sort of action and has a relation to acts,
is not naming also a sort of action?

  Her. True.

  Soc. And we saw that actions were not relative to ourselves, but had
a special nature of their own?

  Her. Precisely.

  Soc. Then the argument would lead us to infer that names ought to be
given according to a natural process, and with a proper instrument,
and not at our pleasure: in this and no other way shall we name with
success.

  Her. I agree.

  Soc. But again, that which has to be cut has to be cut with
something?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And that which has to be woven or pierced has to be woven or
pierced with something?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. And that which has to be named has to be named with something?

  Her. True.

  Soc. What is that with which we pierce?

  Her. An awl.

  Soc. And with which we weave?

  Her. A shuttle.

  Soc. And with which we name?

  Her. A name.

  Soc. Very good: then a name is an instrument?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. Suppose that I ask, "What sort of instrument is a shuttle?" And
you answer, "A weaving instrument."

  Her. Well.

  Soc. And I ask again, "What do we do when we weave?"- The answer is,
that we separate or disengage the warp from the woof.

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. And may not a similar description be given of an awl, and of
instruments in general?

  Her. To be sure.

  Soc. And now suppose that I ask a similar question about names: will
you answer me? Regarding the name as an instrument, what do we do when
we name?

  Her. I cannot say.

  Soc. Do we not give information to one another, and distinguish
things according to their natures?

  Her. Certainly we do.

  Soc. Then a name is an instrument of teaching and of
distinguishing natures, as the shuttle is of distinguishing the
threads of the web.

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And the shuttle is the instrument of the weaver?

  Her. Assuredly.

  Soc. Then the weaver will use the shuttle well- and well means
like a weaver? and the teacher will use the name well- and well
means like a teacher?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And when the weaver uses the shuttle, whose work will he be
using well?

  Her. That of the carpenter.

  Soc. And is every man a carpenter, or the skilled only?

  Her. Only the skilled.

  Soc. And when the piercer uses the awl, whose work will he be
using well?

  Her. That of the smith.

  Soc. And is every man a smith, or only the skilled?

  Her. The skilled only.

  Soc. And when the teacher uses the name, whose work will he be
using?

  Her. There again I am puzzled.

  Soc. Cannot you at least say who gives us the names which we use?

  Her. Indeed I cannot.

  Soc. Does not the law seem to you to give us them?

  Her. Yes, I suppose so.

  Soc. Then the teacher, when he gives us a name, uses the work of the
legislator?

  Her. I agree.

  Soc. And is every man a legislator, or the skilled only?

  Her. The skilled only.

  Soc. Then, Hermogenes, not every man is able to give a name, but
only a maker of names; and this is the legislator, who of all
skilled artisans in the world is the rarest.

  Her. True.

  Soc. And how does the legislator make names? and to what does he
look? Consider this in the light of the previous instances: to what
does the carpenter look in making the shuttle? Does he not look to
that which is naturally fitted to act as a shuttle?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. And suppose the shuttle to be broken in making, will he make
another, looking to the broken one? or will he look to the form
according to which he made the other?

  Her. To the latter, I should imagine.

  Soc. Might not that be justly called the true or ideal shuttle?

  Her. I think so.

  SOC. And whatever shuttles are wanted, for the manufacture of
garments, thin or thick, of flaxen, woollen, or other material,
ought all of them to have the true form of the shuttle; and whatever
is the shuttle best adapted to each kind of work, that ought to be the
form which the maker produces in each case.

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And the same holds of other instruments: when a man has
discovered the instrument which is naturally adapted to each work,
he must express this natural form, and not others which he fancies, in
the material, whatever it may be, which he employs; for example, he
ought to know how to put into iron the forms of awls adapted by nature
to their several uses?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. And how to put into wood forms of shuttles adapted by nature to
their uses?

  Her. True.

  Soc. For the several forms of shuttles naturally answer to the
several kinds of webs; and this is true of instruments in general.

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. Then, as to names: ought not our legislator also to know how to
put the true natural names of each thing into sounds and syllables and
to make and give all names with a view to the ideal name, if he is
to be a namer in any true sense? And we must remember that different
legislators will not use the same syllables. For neither does every
smith, although he may be making the same instrument for the same
purpose, make them all of the same iron. The form must be the same,
but the material may vary, and still the instrument may be equally
good of whatever iron made, whether in Hellas or in a foreign
country;- there is no difference.

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. And the legislator, whether he be Hellene or barbarian, is
not therefore to be deemed by you a worse legislator, provided he
gives the true and proper form of the name in whatever syllables; this
or that country makes no matter.

  Her. Quite true.

  Soc. But who then is to determine whether the proper form is given
to the shuttle, whatever sort of wood may be used? the carpenter who
makes, or the weaver who is to use them?

  Her. I should say, he who is to use them, Socrates.

  Soc. And who uses the work of the lyremaker? Will not he be the
man who knows how to direct what is being done, and who will know also
whether the work is being well done or not?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. And who is he?

  Her. The player of the lyre.

  Soc. And who will direct the shipwright?

  Her. The pilot.

  Soc. And who will be best able to direct the legislator in his work,
and will know whether the work is well done, in this or any other
country? Will not the user be the man?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And this is he who knows how to ask questions?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And how to answer them?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And him who knows how to ask and answer you would call a
dialectician?

  Her. Yes; that would be his name.

  Soc. Then the work of the carpenter is to make a rudder, and the
pilot has to direct him, if the rudder is to be well made.

  Her. True.

  Soc. And the work of the legislator is to give names, and the
dialectician must be his director if the names are to be rightly
given?

  Her. That is true.

  Soc. Then, Hermogenes, I should say that this giving of names can be
no such light matter as you fancy, or the work of light or chance
persons; and Cratylus is right in saying that things have names by
nature, and that not every man is an artificer of names, but he only
who looks to the name which each thing by nature has, and is able to
express the true forms of things in letters and syllables.

  Her. I cannot answer you, Socrates; but I find a difficulty in
changing my opinion all in a moment, and I think that I should be more
readily persuaded, if you would show me what this is which you term
the natural fitness of names.

  Soc. My good Hermogenes, I have none to show. Was I not telling
you just now (but you have forgotten), that I knew nothing, and
proposing to share the enquiry with you? But now that you and I have
talked over the matter, a step has been gained; for we have discovered
that names have by nature a truth, and that not every man knows how to
give a thing a name.

  Her. Very good.

  Soc. And what is the nature of this truth or correctness of names?
That, if you care to know, is the next question.

  Her. Certainly, I care to know.

  Soc. Then reflect.

  Her. How shall I reflect?

  Soc. The true way is to have the assistance of those who know, and
you must pay them well both in money and in thanks; these are the
Sophists, of whom your brother, Callias, has- rather dearly- bought
the reputation of wisdom. But you have not yet come into your
inheritance, and therefore you had better go to him, and beg and
entreat him to tell you what he has learnt from Protagoras about the
fitness of names.

  Her. But how inconsistent should I be, if, whilst repudiating
Protagoras and his Truth, I were to attach any value to what he and
his book affirm!

  Soc. Then if you despise him, you must learn of Homer and the poets.

  Her. And where does Homer say anything about names, and what does he
say?

  Soc. He often speaks of them; notably and nobly in the places
where he distinguishes the different names which Gods and men give
to the same things. Does he not in these passages make a remarkable
statement about the correctness of names? For the Gods must clearly be
supposed to call things by their right and natural names; do you not
think so?

  Her. Why, of course they call them rightly, if they call them at
all. But to what are you referring?

  Soc. Do you not know what he says about the river in Troy who had
a single combat with Hephaestus?

     Whom the Gods call Xanthus, and men call Scamander.

  Her. I remember.

  Soc. Well, and about this river- to know that he ought to be
called Xanthus and not Scamander- is not that a solemn lesson? Or
about the bird which, as he says,

     The Gods call Chalcis, and men Cymindis:

to be taught how much more correct the name Chalcis is than the name
Cymindis- do you deem that a light matter? Or about Batieia and
Myrina? And there are many other observations of the same kind in
Homer and other poets. Now, I think that this is beyond the
understanding of you and me; but the names of Scamandrius and
Astyanax, which he affirms to have been the names of Hector's son, are
more within the range of human faculties, as I am disposed to think;
and what the poet means by correctness may be more readily apprehended
in that instance: you will remember I dare say the lines to which I
refer?

  Her. I do.

  Soc. Let me ask you, then, which did Homer think the more correct of
the names given to Hector's son- Astyanax or Scamandrius?

  Her. I do not know.

  Soc. How would you answer, if you were asked whether the wise or the
unwise are more likely to give correct names?

  Her. I should say the wise, of course.

  Soc. And are the men or the women of a city, taken as a class, the
wiser?

  Her. I should say, the men.

  Soc. And Homer, as you know, says that the Trojan men called him
Astyanax (king of the city); but if the men called him Astyanax, the
other name of Scamandrius could only have been given to him by the
women.

  Her. That may be inferred.

  Soc. And must not Homer have imagined the Trojans to be wiser than
their wives?

  Her. To be sure.

  Soc. Then he must have thought Astyanax to be a more correct name
for the boy than Scamandrius?

  Her. Clearly.

  Soc. And what is the reason of this? Let us consider:- does he not
himself suggest a very good reason, when he says,

     For he alone defended their city and long walls?

This appears to be a good reason for calling the son of the saviour
king of the city which his father was saving, as Homer observes.

  Her. I see.

  Soc. Why, Hermogenes, I do not as yet see myself; and do you?

  Her. No, indeed; not I.

  Soc. But tell me, friend, did not Homer himself also give Hector his
name?

  Her. What of that?

  Soc. The name appears to me to be very nearly the same as the name
of Astyanax- both are Hellenic; and a king (anax) and a holder (ektor)
have nearly the same meaning, and are both descriptive of a king;
for a man is clearly the holder of that of which he is king; he rules,
and owns, and holds it. But, perhaps, you may think that I am
talking nonsense; and indeed I believe that I myself did not know what
I meant when I imagined that I had found some indication of the
opinion of Homer about the correctness of names.

  Her. I assure you that I think otherwise, and I believe you to be on
the right track.

  Soc. There is reason, I think, in calling the lion's whelp a lion,
and the foal of a horse a horse; I am speaking only of the ordinary
course of nature, when an animal produces after his kind, and not of
extraordinary births;- if contrary to nature a horse have a calf, then
I should not call that a foal but a calf; nor do I call any inhuman
birth a man, but only a natural birth. And the same may be said of
trees and other things. Do you agree with me?

  Her. Yes, I agree.

  Soc. Very good. But you had better watch me and see that I do not
play tricks with you. For on the same principle the son of a king is
to be called a king. And whether the syllables of the name are the
same or not the same, makes no difference, provided the meaning is
retained; nor does the addition or subtraction of a letter make any
difference so long as the essence of the thing remains in possession
of the name and appears in it.

  Her. What do you mean?

  Soc. A very simple matter. I may illustrate my meaning by the
names of letters, which you know are not the same as the letters
themselves with the exception of the four e, u, o (short), o (long);
the names of the rest, whether vowels or consonants, are made up of
other letters which we add to them; but so long as we introduce the
meaning, and there can be no mistake, the name of the letter is
quite correct. Take, for example, the letter beta- the addition of
e, t, a, gives no offence, and does not prevent the whole name from
having the value which the legislator intended- so well did he know
how to give the letters names.

  Her. I believe you are right.

  Soc. And may not the same be said of a king? a king will often be
the son of a king, the good son or the noble son of a good or noble
sire; and similarly the off spring of every kind, in the regular
course of nature, is like the parent, and therefore has the same name.
Yet the syllables may be disguised until they appear different to
the ignorant person, and he may not recognize them, although they
are the same, just as any one of us would not recognize the same drugs
under different disguises of colour and smell, although to the
physician, who regards the power of them, they are the same, and he is
not put out by the addition; and in like manner the etymologist is not
put out by the addition or transposition or subtraction of a letter or
two, or indeed by the change of all the letters, for this need not
interfere with the meaning. As was just now said, the names of
Hector and Astyanax have only one letter alike, which is t, and yet
they have the same meaning. And how little in common with the
letters of their names has Archepolis (ruler of the city)- and yet the
meaning is the same. And there are many other names which just mean
"king." Again, there are several names for a general, as, for example,
Agis (leader) and Polemarchus (chief in war) and Eupolemus (good
warrior); and others which denote a physician, as Iatrocles (famous
healer) and Acesimbrotus (curer of mortals); and there are many others
which might be cited, differing in their syllables and letters, but
having the same meaning. Would you not say so?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. The same names, then, ought to be assigned to those who
follow in the course of nature?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And what of those who follow out of the course of nature, and
are prodigies? for example, when a good and religious man has an
irreligious son, he ought to bear the name not of his father, but of
the class to which he belongs, just as in the case which was before
supposed of a horse foaling a calf.

  Her. Quite true.

  Soc. Then the irreligious son of a religious father should be called
irreligious?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. He should not be called Theophilus (beloved of God) or
Mnesitheus (mindful of God), or any of these names: if names are
correctly given, his should have an opposite meaning.

  Her. Certainly, Socrates.

  Soc. Again, Hermogenes, there is Orestes (the man of the
mountains) who appears to be rightly called; whether chance gave the
name, or perhaps some poet who meant to express the brutality and
fierceness and mountain wildness of his hero's nature.

  Her. That is very likely, Socrates.

  Soc. And his father's name is also according to nature.

  Her. Clearly.

  Soc. Yes, for as his name, so also is his nature; Agamemnon
(admirable for remaining) is one who is patient and persevering in the
accomplishment of his resolves, and by his virtue crowns them; and his
continuance at Troy with all the vast army is a proof of that
admirable endurance in him which is signified by the name Agamemnon. I
also think that Atreus is rightly called; for his murder of Chrysippus
and his exceeding cruelty to Thyestes are damaging and destructive
to his reputation- the name is a little altered and disguised so as
not to be intelligible to every one, but to the etymologist there is
no difficulty in seeing the meaning, for whether you think of him as
ateires the stubborn, or as atrestos the fearless, or as ateros the
destructive one, the name is perfectly correct in every point of view.
And I think that Pelops is also named appropriately; for, as the
name implies, he is rightly called Pelops who sees what is near only
(o ta pelas oron).

  Her. How so?

  Soc. Because, according to the tradition, he had no forethought or
foresight of all the evil which the murder of Myrtilus would entail
upon his whole race in remote ages; he saw only what was at hand and
immediate,- Or in other words, pelas (near), in his eagerness to win
Hippodamia by all means for his bride. Every one would agree that
the name of Tantalus is rightly given and in accordance with nature,
if the traditions about him are true.

  Her. And what are the traditions?

  Soc. Many terrible misfortunes are said to have happened to him in
his life- last of all, came the utter ruin of his country; and after
his death he had the stone suspended (talanteia) over his head in
the world below- all this agrees wonderfully well with his name. You
might imagine that some person who wanted to call him Talantatos
(the most weighted down by misfortune), disguised the name by altering
it into Tantalus; and into this form, by some accident of tradition,
it has actually been transmuted. The name of Zeus, who is his
alleged father, has also an excellent meaning, although hard to be
understood, because really like a sentence, which is divided into
two parts, for some call him Zena, and use the one half, and others
who use the other half call him Dia; the two together signify the
nature of the God, and the business of a name, as we were saying, is
to express the nature. For there is none who is more the author of
life to us and to all, than the lord and king of all. Wherefore we are
right in calling him Zena and Dia, which are one name, although
divided, meaning the God through whom all creatures always have life
(di on zen aei pasi tois zosin uparchei). There is an irreverence,
at first sight, in calling him son of Cronos (who is a proverb for
stupidity), and we might rather expect Zeus to be the child of a
mighty intellect. Which is the fact; for this is the meaning of his
father's name: Kronos quasi Koros (Choreo, to sweep), not in the sense
of a youth, but signifying to chatharon chai acheraton tou nou, the
pure and garnished mind (sc. apo tou chorein). He, as we are
informed by tradition, was begotten of Uranus, rightly so called
(apo tou oran ta ano) from looking upwards; which, as philosophers
tell us, is the way to have a pure mind, and the name Uranus is
therefore correct. If I could remember the genealogy of Hesiod, I
would have gone on and tried more conclusions of the same sort on
the remoter ancestors of the Gods,- then I might have seen whether
this wisdom, which has come to me all in an instant, I know not
whence, will or will not hold good to the end.

  Her. You seem to me, Socrates, to be quite like a prophet newly
inspired, and to be uttering oracles.

  Soc. Yes, Hermogenes, and I believe that I caught the inspiration
from the great Euthyphro of the Prospaltian deme, who gave me a long
lecture which commenced at dawn: he talked and I listened, and his
wisdom and enchanting ravishment has not only filled my ears but taken
possession of my soul,and to-day I shall let his superhuman power work
and finish the investigation of names- that will be the way; but
to-morrow, if you are so disposed, we will conjure him away, and
make a purgation of him, if we can only find some priest or sophist
who is skilled in purifications of this sort.

  Her. With all my heart; for am very curious to hear the rest of
the enquiry about names.

  Soc. Then let us proceed; and where would you have us begin, now
that we have got a sort of outline of the enquiry? Are there any names
which witness of themselves that they are not given arbitrarily, but
have a natural fitness? The names of heroes and of men in general
are apt to be deceptive because they are often called after
ancestors with whose names, as we were saying, they may have no
business; or they are the expression of a wish like Eutychides (the
son of good fortune), or Sosias (the Saviour), or Theophilus (the
beloved of God), and others. But I think that we had better leave
these, for there will be more chance of finding correctness in the
names of immutable essences;- there ought to have been more care taken
about them when they were named, and perhaps there may have been
some more than human power at work occasionally in giving them names.

  Her. I think so, Socrates.

  Soc. Ought we not to begin with the consideration of the Gods, and
show that they are" rightly named Gods?

  Her. Yes, that will be well.

  Soc. My notion would be something of this sort:- I suspect that
the sun, moon, earth, stars, and heaven, which are still the Gods of
many barbarians, were the only Gods known to the aboriginal
Hellenes. Seeing that they were always moving and running, from
their running nature they were called Gods or runners (Theous,
Theontas); and when men became acquainted with the other Gods, they
proceeded to apply the same name to them all. Do you think that
likely?

  Her. I think it very likely indeed.

  Soc. What shall follow the Gods?

  Her. Must not demons and heroes and men come next?

  Soc. Demons! And what do you consider to be the meaning of this
word? Tell me if my view is right.

  Her. Let me hear.

  Soc. You know how Hesiod uses the word?

  Her. I do not.

  Soc. Do you not remember that he speaks of a golden race of men
who came first?

  Her. Yes, I do.

  Soc. He says of them-

     But now that fate has closed over this race

     They are holy demons upon the earth,

     Beneficent, averters of ills, guardians of mortal men.

  Her. What is the inference?

  Soc. What is the inference! Why, I suppose that he means by the
golden men, not men literally made of gold, but good and noble; and
I am convinced of this, because he further says that we are the iron
race.

  Her. That is true.

  Soc. And do you not suppose that good men of our own day would by
him be said to be of golden race?

  Her. Very likely.

  Soc. And are not the good wise?

  Her. Yes, they are wise.

  Soc. And therefore I have the most entire conviction that he
called them demons, because they were daemones (knowing or wise),
and in our older Attic dialect the word itself occurs. Now he and
other poets say truly, that when a good man dies he has honour and a
mighty portion among the dead, and becomes a demon; which is a name
given to him signifying wisdom. And I say too, that every wise man who
happens to be a good man is more than human (daimonion) both in life
and death, and is rightly called a demon.

  Her. Then I rather think that I am of one mind with you; but what is
the meaning of the word "hero"? (eros)

  Soc. I think that there is no difficulty in explaining, for the name
is not much altered, and signifies that they were born of love.

  Her. What do you mean?

  Soc. Do you not know that the heroes are demigods?

  Her. What then?

  Soc. All of them sprang either from the love of a God for a mortal
woman, or of a mortal man for a Goddess; think of the word in the
old Attic, and you will see better that the name heros is only a
slight alteration of Eros, from whom the heroes sprang: either this is
the meaning, or, if not this, then they must have been skilful as
rhetoricians and dialecticians, and able to put the question (erotan),
for eirein is equivalent to legein. And therefore, as I was saying, in
the Attic dialect the heroes turn out to be rhetoricians and
questioners. All this is easy enough; the noble breed of heroes are
a tribe of sophists and rhetors. But can you tell me why men are
called anthropoi?- that is more difficult.

  Her. No, I cannot; and I would not try even if I could, because I
think that you are the more likely to succeed.

  Soc. That is to say, you trust to the inspiration of Euthyphro.

  Her. Of course.

  Soc. Your faith is not vain; for at this very moment a new and
ingenious thought strikes me, and, if I am not careful, before
tomorrow's dawn I shall be wiser than I ought to be. Now, attend to
me; and first, remember that we of put in and pull out letters in
words, and give names as we please and change the accents. Take, for
example, the word Dii Philos; in order to convert this from a sentence
into a noun, we omit one of the iotas and sound the middle syllable
grave instead of acute; as, on the other hand, letters are sometimes
inserted in words instead of being omitted, and the acute takes the
place of the grave.

  Her. That is true.

  Soc. The name anthropos, which was once a sentence, and is now a
noun, appears to be a case just of this sort, for one letter, which is
the a, has been omitted, and the acute on the last syllable has been
changed to a grave.

  Her. What do you mean?

  Soc. I mean to say that the word "man" implies that other animals
never examine, or consider, or look up at what they see, but that
man not only sees (opope) but considers and looks up at that which
he sees, and hence he alone of all animals is rightly anthropos,
meaning anathron a opopen.

  Her. May I ask you to examine another word about which I am curious?

  Soc. Certainly.

  Her. I will take that which appears to me to follow next in order.
You know the distinction of soul and body?

  Soc. Of course.

  Her. Let us endeavour to analyze them like the previous words.

  Soc. You want me first of all to examine the natural fitness of
the word psnche (soul), and then of the word soma (body)?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. If I am to say what occurs to me at the moment, I should
imagine that those who first use the name psnche meant to express that
the soul when in the body is the source of life, and gives the power
of breath and revival (anapsuchon), and when this reviving power fails
then the body perishes and dies, and this, if I am not mistaken,
they called psyche. But please stay a moment; I fancy that I can
discover something which will be more acceptable to the disciples of
Euthyphro, for I am afraid that they will scorn this explanation. What
do you say to another?

  Her. Let me hear.

  Soc. What is that which holds and carries and gives life and
motion to the entire nature of the body? What else but the soul?

  Her. Just that.

  Soc. And do you not believe with Anaxagoras, that mind or soul is
the ordering and containing principle of all things?

  Her. Yes; I do.

  Soc. Then you may well call that power phuseche which carries and
holds nature (e phusin okei, kai ekei), and this may be refined away
into psuche.

 Her. Certainly; and this derivation is, I think, more scientific than
the other.

  Soc. It is so; but I cannot help laughing, if I am to suppose that
this was the true meaning of the name.

  Her. But what shall we say of the next word?

  Soc. You mean soma (the body).

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. That may be variously interpreted; and yet more variously if
a little permutation is allowed. For some say that the body is the
grave (sema) of the soul which may be thought to be buried in our
present life; or again the index of the soul, because the soul gives
indications to (semainei) the body; probably the Orphic poets were the
inventors of the name, and they were under the impression that the
soul is suffering the punishment of sin, and that the body is an
enclosure or prison in which the soul is incarcerated, kept safe
(soma, sozetai), as the name ooma implies, until the penalty is
paid; according to this view, not even a letter of the word need be
changed.

  Her. I think, Socrates, that we have said enough of this class of
words. But have we any more explanations of the names of the Gods,
like that which you were giving of Zeus? I should like to know whether
any similar principle of correctness is to be applied to them.

  Soc. Yes, indeed, Hermogenes; and there is one excellent principle
which, as men of sense, we must acknowledge,- that of the Gods we know
nothing, either of their natures or of the names which they give
themselves; but we are sure that the names by which they call
themselves, whatever they may be, are true. And this is the best of
all principles; and the next best is to say, as in prayers, that we
will call them by any sort of kind names or patronymics which they
like, because we do not know of any other. That also, I think, is a
very good custom, and one which I should much wish to observe. Let us,
then, if you please, in the first place announce to them that we are
not enquiring about them; we do not presume that we are able to do so;
but we are enquiring about the meaning of men in giving them these
names,- in this there can be small blame.

  Her. I think, Socrates, that you are quite right, and I would like
to do as you say.

  Soc. Shall we begin, then, with Hestia, according to custom?

  Her. Yes, that will be very proper.

  Soc. What may we suppose him to have meant who gave the name Hestia?

  Her. That is another and certainly a most difficult question.

  Soc. My dear Hermogenes, the first imposers of names must surely
have been considerable persons; they were philosophers, and had a good
deal to say.

  Her. Well, and what of them?

  Soc. They are the men to whom I should attribute the imposition of
names. Even in foreign names, if you analyze them, a meaning is
still discernible. For example, that which we term ousia is by some
called esia, and by others again osia. Now that the essence of
things should be called estia, which is akin to the first of these
(esia = estia), is rational enough. And there is reason in the
Athenians calling that estia which participates in ousia. For in
ancient times we too seem to have said esia for ousia, and this you
may note to have been the idea of those who appointed that
sacrifices should be first offered to estia, which was natural
enough if they meant that estia was the essence of things. Those again
who read osia seem to have inclined to the opinion of Heracleitus,
that all things flow and nothing stands; with them the pushing
principle (othoun) is the cause and ruling power of all things, and is
therefore rightly called osia. Enough of this, which is all that we
who know nothing can affirm. Next in order after Hestia we ought to
consider Rhea and Cronos, although the name of Cronos has been already
discussed. But I dare say that I am talking great nonsense.

  Her. Why, Socrates?

  Soc. My good friend, I have discovered a hive of wisdom.

  Her. Of what nature?

  Soc. Well, rather ridiculous, and yet plausible.

  Her. How plausible?

  Soc. I fancy to myself Heracleitus repeating wise traditions of
antiquity as old as the days of Cronos and Rhea, and of which Homer
also spoke.

  Her. How do you mean?

  Soc. Heracleitus is supposed to say that all things are in motion
and nothing at rest; he compares them to the stream of a river, and
says that you cannot go into the same water twice.

  Her. That is true.

  Soc. Well, then, how can we avoid inferring that he who gave the
names of Cronos and Rhea to the ancestors of the Gods, agreed pretty
much in the doctrine of Heracleitus? Is the giving of the names of
streams to both of them purely accidental? Compare the line in which
Homer, and, as I believe, Hesiod also, tells of

     Ocean, the origin of Gods, and mother Tethys.

And again, Orpheus says, that

     The fair river of Ocean was the first to marry, and he espoused
his sister Tethys, who was his mother's daughter.

You see that this is a remarkable coincidence, and all in the
direction of Heracleitus.

  Her. I think that there is something in what you say, Socrates;
but I do not understand the meaning of the name Tethys.

  Soc. Well, that is almost self-explained, being only the name of a
spring, a little disguised; for that which is strained and filtered
(diattomenon, ethoumenon) may be likened to a spring, and the name
Tethys is made up of these two words.

  Her. The idea is ingenious, Socrates.

  Soc. To be sure. But what comes next?- of Zeus we have spoken.

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. Then let us next take his two brothers, Poseidon and Pluto,
whether the latter is called by that or by his other name.

  Her. By all means.

  Soc. Poseidon is Posidesmos, the chain of the feet; the original
inventor of the name had been stopped by the watery element in his
walks, and not allowed to go on, and therefore he called the ruler
of this element Poseidon; the e was probably inserted as an
ornament. Yet, perhaps, not so; but the name may have been
originally written with a double l and not with an s, meaning that the
God knew many things (Polla eidos). And perhaps also he being the
shaker of the earth, has been named from shaking (seiein), and then
p and d have been added. Pluto gives wealth (Ploutos), and his name
means the giver of wealth, which comes out of the earth beneath.
People in general appear to imagine that the term Hades is connected
with the invisible (aeides) and so they are led by their fears to call
the God Pluto instead.

  Her. And what is the true derivation?

  Soc. In spite of the mistakes which are made about the power of this
deity, and the foolish fears which people have of him, such as the
fear of always being with him after death, and of the soul denuded
of the body going to him, my belief is that all is quite consistent,
and that the office and name of the God really correspond.

  Her. Why, how is that?

  Soc. I will tell you my own opinion; but first, I should like to ask
you which chain does any animal feel to be the stronger? and which
confines him more to the same spot,- desire or necessity?

  Her. Desire, Socrates, is stronger far.

  Soc. And do you not think that many a one would escape from Hades,
if he did not bind those who depart to him by the strongest of chains?

  Her. Assuredly they would.

  Soc. And if by the greatest of chains, then by some desire, as I
should certainly infer, and not by necessity?

  Her. That is clear.

  Soc. And there are many desires?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And therefore by the greatest desire, if the chain is to be the
greatest?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. And is any desire stronger than the thought that you will be
made better by associating with another?

  Her. Certainly not.

  Soc. And is not that the reason, Hermogenes, why no one, who has
been to him, is willing to come back to us? Even the Sirens, like
all the rest of the world, have been laid under his spells. Such a
charm, as I imagine, is the God able to infuse into his words. And,
according to this view, he is the perfect and accomplished Sophist,
and the great benefactor of the inhabitants of the other world; and
even to us who are upon earth he sends from below exceeding blessings.
For he has much more than he wants down there; wherefore he is
called Pluto (or the rich). Note also, that he will have nothing to do
with men while they are in the body, but only when the soul is
liberated from the desires and evils of the body. Now there is a great
deal of philosophy and reflection in that; for in their liberated
state he can bind them with the desire of virtue, but while they are
flustered and maddened by the body, not even father Cronos himself
would suffice to keep them with him in his own far-famed chains.

  Her. There is a deal of truth in what you say.

  Soc. Yes, Hermogenes, and the legislator called him Hades, not
from the unseen (aeides)- far otherwise, but from his knowledge
(eidenai) of all noble things.

  Her. Very good; and what do we say of Demeter, and Here, and Apollo,
and Athene, and Hephaestus, and Ares, and the other deities?

  Soc. Demeter is e didousa meter, who gives food like a mother;
Here is the lovely one (erate)- for Zeus, according to tradition,
loved and married her; possibly also the name may have been given when
the legislator was thinking of the heavens, and may be only a disguise
of the air (aer), putting the end in the place of the beginning. You
will recognize the truth of this if you repeat the letters of Here
several times over. People dread the name of Pherephatta as they dread
the name of Apollo- and with as little reason; the fear, if I am not
mistaken, only arises from their ignorance of the nature of names. But
they go changing the name into Phersephone, and they are terrified
at this; whereas the new name means only that the Goddess is wise
(sophe); for seeing that all things in the world are in motion
(pheromenon), that principle which embraces and touches and is able to
follow them, is wisdom. And therefore the Goddess may be truly
called Pherepaphe (Pherepapha), or some name like it, because she
touches that which is (tou pheromenon ephaptomene), herein showing her
wisdom. And Hades, who is wise, consorts with her, because she is
wise. They alter her name into Pherephatta now-a-days, because the
present generation care for euphony more than truth. There is the
other name, Apollo, which, as I was saying, is generally supposed to
have some terrible signification. Have you remarked this fact?

  Her. To be sure I have, and what you say is true.

  Soc. But the name, in my opinion, is really most expressive of the
power of the God.

  Her. How so?

  Soc. I will endeavour to explain, for I do not believe that any
single name could have been better adapted to express the attributes
of the God, embracing and in a manner signifying all four of them,-
music, and prophecy, and medicine, and archery.

  Her. That must be a strange name, and I should like to hear the
explanation.

  Soc. Say rather an harmonious name, as beseems the God of Harmony.
In the first place, the purgations and purifications which doctors and
diviners use, and their fumigations with drugs magical or medicinal,
as well as their washings and lustral sprinklings, have all one and
the same object, which is to make a man pure both in body and soul.

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. And is not Apollo the purifier, and the washer, and the
absolver from all impurities?

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. Then in reference to his ablutions and absolutions, as being
the physician who orders them, he may be rightly called Apolouon
(purifier); or in respect of his powers of divination, and his truth
and sincerity, which is the same as truth, he may be most fitly called
Aplos, from aplous (sincere), as in the Thessalian dialect, for all
the Thessalians call him Aplos; also he is Ballon (always shooting),
because he is a master archer who never misses; or again, the name may
refer to his musical attributes, and then, as in akolouthos, and
akoitis, and in many other words the a is supposed to mean "together,"
so the meaning of the name Apollo will be "moving together," whether
in the poles of heaven as they are called, or in the harmony of
song, which is termed concord, because he moves all together by an
harmonious power, as astronomers and musicians ingeniously declare.
And he is the God who presides over harmony, and makes all things move
together, both among Gods and among men. And as in the words
akolouthos and akoitis the a is substituted for an o, so the name
Apollon is equivalent to omopolon; only the second l is added in order
to avoid the ill-omened sound of destruction (apolon). Now the
suspicion of this destructive power still haunts the minds of some who
do not consider the true value of the name, which, as I was saying
just now, has reference to all the powers of the God, who is the
single one, the everdarting, the purifier, the mover together (aplous,
aei Ballon, apolouon, omopolon). The name of the Muses and of music
would seem to be derived from their making philosophical enquiries
(mosthai); and Leto is called by this name, because she is such a
gentle Goddess, and so willing (ethelemon) to grant our requests; or
her name may be Letho, as she is often called by strangers- they
seem to imply by it her amiability, and her smooth and easy-going
way of behaving. Artemis is named from her healthy (artemes),
well-ordered nature, and because of her love of virginity, perhaps
because she is a proficient in virtue (arete), and perhaps also as
hating intercourse of the sexes (ton aroton miseasa). He who gave
the Goddess her name may have had any or all of these reasons.

  Her. What is the meaning of Dionysus and Aphrodite?

  Soc. Son of Hipponicus, you ask a solemn question; there is a
serious and also a facetious explanation of both these names; the
serious explanation is not to be had from me, but there is no
objection to your hearing the facetious one; for the Gods too love a
joke. Dionusos is simply didous oinon (giver of wine), as he might
be called in fun,- and oinos is properly oionous, because wine makes
those who drink, think (oiesthai) that they have a mind (noun) when
they have none. The derivation of Aphrodite, born of the foam
(aphoros), may be fairly accepted on the authority of Hesiod.

  Her. Still there remains Athene, whom you, Socrates, as an Athenian,
will surely not forget; there are also Hephaestus and Ares.

  Soc. I am not likely to forget them.

  Her. No, indeed.

  Soc. There is no difficulty in explaining the other appellation of
Athene.

  Her. What other appellation?

  Soc. We call her Pallas.

  Her. To be sure.

  Soc. And we cannot be wrong in supposing that this is derived from
armed dances. For the elevation of oneself or anything else above
the earth, or by the use of the hands, we call shaking (pallein), or
dancing.

  Her. That is quite true.

  Soc. Then that is the explanation of the name Pallas?

  Her. Yes; but what do you say of the other name?

  Soc. Athene?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. That is a graver matter, and there, my friend, the modern
interpreters of Homer may, I think, assist in explaining the view of
the ancients. For most of these in their explanations of the poet,
assert that he meant by Athene "mind" (nous) and "intelligence"
(dianoia), and the maker of names appears to have had a singular
notion about her; and indeed calls her by a still higher title,
"divine intelligence" (Thou noesis), as though he would say: This is
she who has the mind of God (Theonoa);- using a as a dialectical
variety e, and taking away i and s. Perhaps, however, the name Theonoe
may mean "she who knows divine things" (Theia noousa) better than
others. Nor shall we be far wrong in supposing that the author of it
wished to identify this Goddess with moral intelligence (en ethei
noesin), and therefore gave her the name ethonoe; which, however,
either he or his successors have altered into what they thought a
nicer form, and called her Athene.

  Her. But what do you say of Hephaestus?

  Soc. Speak you of the princely lord of light (Phaeos istora)?

  Her. Surely.

  Soc. Ephaistos is Phaistos, and has added the e by attraction;
that is obvious to anybody.

  Her. That is very probable, until some more probable notion gets
into your head.

  Soc. To prevent that, you had better ask what is the derivation of
Ares.

  Her. What is Ares?

  Soc. Ares may be called, if you will, from his manhood (arren) and
manliness, or if you please, from his hard and unchangeable nature,
which is the meaning of arratos: the latter is a derivation in every
way appropriate to the God of war.

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. And now, by the Gods, let us have no more of the Gods, for I am
afraid of them; ask about anything but them, and thou shalt see how
the steeds of Euthyphro can prance.

  Her. Only one more God! I should like to know about Hermes, of
whom I am said not to be a true son. Let us make him out, and then I
shall know whether there is any meaning in what Cratylus says.

  Soc. I should imagine that the name Hermes has to do with speech,
and signifies that he is the interpreter (ermeneus), or messenger,
or thief, or liar, or bargainer; all that sort of thing has a great
deal to do with language; as I was telling you the word eirein is
expressive of the use of speech, and there is an often-recurring
Homeric word emesato, which means "he contrived"- out of these two
words, eirein and mesasthai, the legislator formed the name of the God
who invented language and speech; and we may imagine him dictating
to us the use of this name: "O my friends," says he to us, "seeing
that he is the contriver of tales or speeches, you may rightly call
him Eirhemes." And this has been improved by us, as we think, into
Hermes. Iris also appears to have been called from the verb "to
tell" (eirein), because she was a messenger.

  Her. Then I am very sure that Cratylus was quite right in saying
that I was no true son of Hermes (Ermogenes), for I am not a good hand
at speeches.

  Soc. There is also reason, my friend, in Pan being the double-formed
son of Hermes.

  Her. How do you make that out?

  Soc. You are aware that speech signifies all things (pan), and is
always turning them round and round, and has two forms, true and
false?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. Is not the truth that is in him the smooth or sacred form which
dwells above among the Gods, whereas falsehood dwells among men below,
and is rough like the goat of tragedy; for tales and falsehoods have
generally to do with the tragic or goatish life, and tragedy is the
place of them?

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. Then surely Pan, who is the declarer of all things (pan) and
the perpetual mover (aei polon) of all things, is rightly called
aipolos (goat-herd), he being the two-formed son of Hermes, smooth
in his upper part, and rough and goatlike in his lower regions. And,
as the son of Hermes, he is speech or the brother of speech, and
that brother should be like brother is no marvel. But, as I was
saying, my dear Hermogenes, let us get away from the Gods.

  Her. From these sort of Gods, by all means, Socrates. But why should
we not discuss another kind of Gods- the sun, moon, stars, earth,
aether, air, fire, water, the seasons, and the year?

  Soc. You impose a great many tasks upon me. Still, if you wish, I
will not refuse.

  Her. You will oblige me.

  Soc. How would you have me begin? Shall I take first of all him whom
you mentioned first- the sun?

  Her. Very good.

  Soc. The origin of the sun will probably be clearer in the Doric
form, for the Dorians call him alios, and this name is given to him
because when he rises he gathers (alizoi) men together or because he
is always rolling in his course (aei eilein ion) about the earth; or
from aiolein, of which meaning is the same as poikillein (to
variegate), because he variegates the productions of the earth.

  Her. But what is selene (the moon)?

  Soc. That name is rather unfortunate for Anaxagoras.

  Her. How so?

  Soc. The word seems to forestall his recent discovery, that the moon
receives her light from the sun.

  Her. Why do you say so?

  Soc. The two words selas (brightness) and phos (light) have much the
same meaning?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. This light about the moon is always new (neon) and always old
(enon), if the disciples of Anaxagoras say truly. For the sun in his
revolution always adds new light, and there is the old light of the
previous month.

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. The moon is not unfrequently called selanaia.

  Her. True.

  Soc. And as she has a light which is always old and always new (enon
neon aei) she may very properly have the name selaenoneoaeia; and this
when hammered into shape becomes selanaia.

  Her. A real dithyrambic sort of name that, Socrates. But what do you
say of the month and the stars?

  Soc. Meis (month) is called from meiousthai (to lessen), because
suffering diminution; the name of astra (stars) seems to be derived
from astrape, which is an improvement on anastphope, signifying the
upsetting of the eyes (anastrephein opa).

  Her. What do you say of pur (fire) and udor (water)?

  Soc. I am at a loss how to explain pur; either the muse of Euthyphro
has deserted me, or there is some very great difficulty in the word.
Please, however, to note the contrivance which I adopt whenever I am
in a difficulty of this sort.

  Her. What is it?

  Soc. I will tell you; but I should like to know first whether you
can tell me what is the meaning of the pur?

  Her. Indeed I cannot.

  Soc. Shall I tell you what I suspect to be the true explanation of
this and several other words?- My belief is that they are of foreign
origin. For the Hellenes, especially those who were under the dominion
of the barbarians, often borrowed from them.

  Her. What is the inference?

  Soc. Why, you know that any one who seeks to demonstrate the fitness
of these names according to the Hellenic language, and not according
to the language from which the words are derived, is rather likely
to be at fault.

  Her. Yes, certainly.

  Soc. Well then, consider whether this pur is not foreign; for the
word is not easily brought into relation with the Hellenic tongue, and
the Phrygians may be observed to have the same word slightly
changed, just as they have udor (water) and kunes (dogs), and many
other words.

  Her. That is true.

  Soc. Any violent interpretations of the words should be avoided; for
something to say about them may easily be found. And thus I get rid of
pur and udor. Aer (air), Hermogenes, may be explained as the element
which raises (airei) things from the earth, or as ever flowing (aei
pei), or because the flux of the air is wind, and the poets call the
winds "air-blasts," (aetai); he who uses the term may mean, so to
speak, air-flux (aetorroun), in the sense of wind-flux
(pneumatorroun); and because this moving wind may be expressed by
either term he employs the word air (aer = aetes rheo). Aither
(aether) I should interpret as  aeitheer; this may be correctly
said, because this element is always running in a flux about the air
(aei thei peri tou aera ron). The meaning of the word ge (earth) comes
out better when in the form of gaia, for the earth may be truly called
"mother" (gaia, genneteira), as in the language of Homer (Od. ix. 118;
xiii. 160) gegaasi means gegennesthai.

  Her. Good.

  Soc. What shall we take next?

 Her. There are orai (the seasons), and the two names of the year,
eniautos and etos.

  Soc. The orai should be spelt in the old Attic way, if you desire to
know the probable truth about them; they are rightly called the orai
because they divide (orizousin) the summers and winters and winds
and the fruits of the earth. The words eniautos and etos appear to
be the same,- "that which brings to light the plants and growths of
the earth in their turn, and passes them in review within itself (en
eauto exetazei)": this is broken up into two words, eniautos from en
eauto, and etos from etazei, just as the original name of Zeus was
divided into Zena and Dia; and the whole proposition means that his
power of reviewing from within is one, but has two names, two words
etos and eniautos being thus formed out of a single proposition.

  Her. Indeed, Socrates, you make surprising progress.

  Soc. I am run away with.

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. But am not yet at my utmost speed.

  Her. I should like very much to know, in the next place, how you
would explain the virtues. What principle of correctness is there in
those charming words- wisdom, understanding, justice, and the rest
of them?

  Soc. That is a tremendous class of names which you are disinterring;
still, as I have put on the lion's skin, I must not be faint of heart;
and I suppose that I must consider the meaning of wisdom (phronesis)
and understanding (sunesis), and judgment (gnome), and knowledge
(episteme), and all those other charming words, as you call them?

  Her. Surely, we must not leave off until we find out their meaning.

  Soc. By the dog of Egypt I have not a bad notion which came into
my head only this moment: I believe that the primeval givers of
names were undoubtedly like too many of our modern philosophers,
who, in their search after the nature of things, are always getting
dizzy from constantly going round and round, and then they imagine
that the world is going round and round and moving in all
directions; and this appearance, which arises out of their own
internal condition, they suppose to be a reality of nature; they think
that there is nothing stable or permanent, but only flux and motion,
and that the world is always full of every sort of motion and
change. The consideration of the names which I mentioned has led me
into making this reflection.

  Her. How is that, Socrates?

  Soc. Perhaps you did not observe that in the names which have been
just cited, the motion or flux or generation of things is most
surely indicated.

  Her. No, indeed, I never thought of it.

  Soc. Take the first of those which you mentioned; clearly that is
a name indicative of motion.

  Her. What was the name?

 Soc. Phronesis (wisdom), which may signify Phoras kai rhou noesis
(perception of motion and flux), or perhaps Phoras onesis (the
blessing of motion), but is at any rate connected with Pheresthai
(motion); gnome (judgment), again, certainly implies the ponderation
or consideration (nomesis) of generation, for to ponder is the same as
to consider; or, if you would rather, here is noesis, the very word
just now mentioned, which is neou esis (the desire of the new); the
word neos implies that the world is always in process of creation. The
giver of the name wanted to express his longing of the soul, for the
original name was neoesis, and not noesis. The word sophrosune is
the salvation (soteria) of that wisdom (phronesis) which we were
just now considering. Epioteme (knowledge) is akin to this, and
indicates that the soul which is good for anything follows (epetai)
the motion of things, neither anticipating them nor falling behind
them; wherefor the word should rather be read as epistemene, inserting
en. Sunesis (understanding) may be regarded in like manner as a kind
of conclusion; the word is derived from sunienai (to go along with),
and, like epistasthai (to know), implies the progression of the soul
in company with the nature of things. Sophia (wisdom) is very dark,
and appears not to be of native growth; the meaning is, touching the
motion or stream of things. You must remember that the poets, when
they speak of the commencement of any rapid motion, often use the word
esuthe (he rushed); and there was a famous Lacedaemonian who was named
Sous (Rush), for by this word the Lacedaemonians signify rapid motion,
and the touching (epaphe) of motion is expressed by sophia, for all
things are supposed to be in motion. Good (agathon) is the name
which is given to the admirable (agasto) in nature; for, although
all things move, still there are degrees of motion; some are
swifter, some slower; but there are some things which are admirable
for their swiftness, and this admirable part of nature is called
agathon. Dikaiosune (justice) is clearly dikaiou sunesis
(understanding of the just); but the actual word dikaion is more
difficult: men are only agreed to a certain extent about justice,
and then they begin to disagree.

  For those who suppose all things to be in motion conceive the
greater part of nature to be a mere receptacle; and they say that
there is a penetrating power which passes through all this, and is the
instrument of creation in all, and is the subtlest and swiftest
element; for if it were not the subtlest, and a power which none can
keep out, and also the swiftest, passing by other things as if they
were standing still, it could not penetrate through the moving
universe. And this element, which superintends all things and pieces
(diaion) all, is rightly called dikaion; the letter k is only added
for the sake of euphony. Thus far, as I was saying, there is a general
agreement about the nature of justice; but I, Hermogenes, being an
enthusiastic disciple, have been told in a mystery that the justice of
which I am speaking is also the cause of the world: now a cause is
that because of which anything is created; and some one comes and
whispers in my ear that justice is rightly so called because partaking
of the nature of the cause, and I begin, after hearing what he has
said, to interrogate him gently: "Well, my excellent friend," say I,
"but if all this be true, I still want to know what is justice."
Thereupon they think that I ask tiresome questions, and am leaping
over the barriers, and have been already sufficiently answered, and
they try to satisfy me with one derivation after another, and at
length they quarrel. For one of them says that justice is the sun, and
that he only is the piercing (diaionta) and burning (kaonta) element
which is the guardian of nature. And when I joyfully repeat this
beautiful notion, I am answered by the satirical remark, "What, is
there no justice in the world when the sun is down?" And when I
earnestly beg my questioner to tell me his own honest opinion, he
says, "Fire in the abstract"; but this is not very intelligible.
Another says, "No, not fire in the abstract, but the abstraction of
heat in the fire." Another man professes to laugh at all this, and
says, as Anaxagoras says, that justice is mind, for mind, as they say,
has absolute power, and mixes with nothing, and orders all things, and
passes through all things. At last, my friend, I find myself in far
greater perplexity about the nature of justice than I was before I
began to learn. But still I am of opinion that the name, which has led
me into this digression, was given to justice for the reasons which
I have mentioned.

  Her. I think, Socrates, that you are not improvising now; you must
have heard this from some one else.

  Soc. And not the rest?

  Her. Hardly.

 Soc. Well, then, let me go on in the hope of making you believe in
the originality of the rest. What remains after justice? I do not
think that we have as yet discussed courage (andreia),- injustice
(adikia), which is obviously nothing more than a hindrance to the
penetrating principle (diaiontos), need not be considered. Well, then,
the name of andreia seems to imply a battle;- this battle is in the
world of existence, and according to the doctrine of flux is only
the counterflux (enantia rhon): if you extract the d from andreia, the
name at once signifies the thing, and you may clearly understand
that andreia is not the stream opposed to every stream, but only to
that which is contrary to justice, for otherwise courage would not
have been praised. The words arren (male) and aner (man) also
contain a similar allusion to the same principle of the upward flux
(te ano rhon). Gune (woman) I suspect to be the same word as goun
(birth): thelu (female) appears to be partly derived from thele (the
teat), because the teat is like rain, and makes things flourish
(tethelenai).

  Her. That is surely probable.

  Soc. Yes; and the very word thallein (to flourish) seems to figure
the growth of youth, which is swift and sudden ever. And this is
expressed by the legislator in the name, which is a compound of
thein (running), and allesthai (leaping). Pray observe how I gallop
away when I get on smooth ground. There are a good many names
generally thought to be of importance, which have still to be
explained.

  Her. True.

  Soc. There is the meaning of the word techne (art), for example.

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. That may be identified with echonoe, and expresses the
possession of mind: you have only to take away the t and insert two
o's, one between the ch and n, and another between the n and e.

  Her. That is a very shabby etymology.

  Soc. Yes, my dear friend; but then you know that the original
names have been long ago buried and disguised by people sticking on
and stripping off letters for the sake of euphony, and twisting and
bedizening them in all sorts of ways: and time too may have had a
share in the change. Take, for example, the word katoptron; why is the
letter r inserted? This must surely be the addition of some one who
cares nothing about the truth, but thinks only of putting the mouth
into shape. And the additions are often such that at last no human
being can possibly make out the original meaning of the word.
Another example is the word sphigx, sphiggos, which ought properly
to be phigx, phiggos, and there are other examples.

  Her. That is quite true, Socrates.

  Soc. And yet, if you are permitted to put in and pull out any
letters which you please, names will be too easily made, and any
name may be adapted to any object.

  Her. True.

  Soc. Yes, that is true. And therefore a wise dictator, like
yourself, should observe the laws of moderation and probability.

  Her. Such is my desire.

  Soc. And mine, too, Hermogenes. But do not be too much of a
precisian, or "you will unnerve me of my strength." When you have
allowed me to add mechane (contrivance) to techne (art) I shall be
at the top of my bent, for I conceive mechane to be a sign of great
accomplishment- anein; for mekos the meaning of greatness, and these
two, mekos and anein, make up the word mechane. But, as I was
saying, being now at the top of my bent, I should like to consider the
meaning of the two words arete (virtue) and kakia (vice) arete I do
not as yet understand, but kakia is transparent, and agrees with the
principles which preceded, for all things being in a flux (ionton),
kakia is kakos ion (going badly); and this evil motion when existing
in the soul has the general name of kakia or vice, specially
appropriated to it. The meaning of kakos ienai may be further
illustrated by the use of deilia (cowardice), which ought to have come
after andreia, but was forgotten, and, as I fear, is not the only word
which has been passed over. Deilia signifies that the soul is bound
with a strong chain (desmos), for lian means strength, and therefore
deilia expresses the greatest and strongest bond of the soul; and
aporia (difficulty) is an evil of the same nature (from a not, and
poreuesthai to go), like anything else which is an impediment to
motion and movement. Then the word kakia appears to mean kakos
ienai, or going badly, or limping and halting; of which the
consequence is, that the soul becomes filled with vice. And if kakia
is the name of this sort of thing, arete will be the opposite of it,
signifying in the first place ease of motion, then that the stream
of the good soul is unimpeded, and has therefore the attribute of ever
flowing without let or hindrance, and is therefore called arete, or,
more correctly, aeireite (ever-flowing), and may perhaps have had
another form, airete (eligible), indicating that nothing is more
eligible than virtue, and this has been hammered into arete. I daresay
that you will deem this to be another invention of mine, but I think
that if the previous word kakia was right, then arete is also right.

  Her. But what is the meaning of kakon, which has played so great a
part in your previous discourse?

  Soc. That is a very singular word about which I can hardly form an
opinion, and therefore I must have recourse to my ingenious device.

  Her. What device?

  Soc. The device of a foreign origin, which I shall give to this word
also.

  Her. Very likely you are right; but suppose that we leave these
words and endeavour to see the rationale of kalon and aischron.

  Soc. The meaning of aischron is evident, being only aei ischon
roes (always preventing from flowing), and this is in accordance
with our former derivations. For the name-giver was a great enemy to
stagnation of all sorts, and hence he gave the name aeischoroun to
that which hindered the flux (aei ischon roun), and that is now beaten
together into aischron.

  Her. But what do you say of kalon?

  Soc. That is more obscure; yet the form is only due to the quantity,
and has been changed by altering ou into o.

  Her. What do you mean?

  Soc. This name appears to denote mind.

  Her. How so?

  Soc. Let me ask you what is the cause why anything has a name; is
not the principle which imposes the name the cause?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. And must not this be the mind of Gods, or of men, or of both?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. Is not mind that which called (kalesan) things by their
names, and is not mind the beautiful (kalon)?

  Her. That is evident.

  Soc. And are not the works of intelligence and mind worthy of
praise, and are not other works worthy of blame?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. Physic does the work of a physician, and carpentering does
the works of a carpenter?

  Her. Exactly.

  Soc. And the principle of beauty does the works of beauty?

  Her. Of course.

  Soc. And that principle we affirm to be mind?

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. Then mind is rightly called beauty because she does the works
which we recognize and speak of as the beautiful?

  Her. That is evident.

  Soc. What more names remain to us?

  Her. There are the words which are connected with agathon and kalon,
such as sumpheron and lusiteloun, ophelimon, kerdaleon, and their
opposites.

  Soc. The meaning of sumpheron (expedient) I think that you may
discover for yourself by the light of the previous examples,- for it
is a sister word to episteme, meaning just the motion (pora) of the
soul accompanying the world, and things which are done upon this
principle are called sumphora or sumpheronta, because they are carried
round with the world.

  Her. That is probable.

  Soc. Again, cherdaleon (gainful) is called from cherdos (gain),
but you must alter the d into n if you want to get at the meaning; for
this word also signifies good, but in another way; he who gave the
name intended to express the power of admixture (kerannumenon) and
universal penetration in the good; in forming the word, however, he
inserted a d instead of an n, and so made kerdos.

  Her. Well, but what is lusiteloun (profitable)?

  Soc. I suppose, Hermogenes, that people do not mean by the
profitable the gainful or that which pays (luei) the retailer, but
they use the word in the sense of swift. You regard the profitable
(lusitelou), as that which being the swiftest thing in existence,
allows of no stay in things and no pause or end of motion, but always,
if there begins to be any end, lets things go again (luei), and
makes motion immortal and unceasing: and in this point of view, as
appears to me, the good is happily denominated lusiteloun- being
that which looses (luon) the end (telos) of motion. Ophelimon (the
advantageous) is derived from ophellein, meaning that which creates
and increases; this latter is a common Homeric word, and has a foreign
character.

  Her. And what do you say of their opposites?

  Soc. Of such as mere negatives I hardly think that I need speak.

  Her. Which are they?

  Soc. The words axumphoron (inexpedient), anopheles (unprofitable),
alusiteles (unadvantageous), akerdes (ungainful).

  Her. True.

  Soc. I would rather take the words blaberon (harmful), zemiodes
(hurtful).

  Her. Good.

  Soc. The word blaberon is that which is said to hinder or harm
(blaptein) the stream (roun); blapton is boulomenon aptein (seeking to
hold or bind); for aptein is the same as dein, and dein is always a
term of censure; boulomenon aptein roun (wanting to bind the stream)
would properly be boulapteroun, and this, as I imagine, is improved
into blaberon.

  Her. You bring out curious results, Socrates, in the use of names;
and when I hear the word boulapteroun I cannot help imagining that you
are making your mouth into a flute, and puffing away at some prelude
to Athene.

  Soc. That is the fault of the makers of the name, Hermogenes; not
mine.

  Her. Very true; but what is the derivation of zemiodes?

  Soc. What is the meaning of zemiodes?- let me remark, Hermogenes,
how right I was in saying that great changes are made in the meaning
of words by putting in and pulling out letters; even a very slight
permutation will sometimes give an entirely opposite sense; I may
instance the word deon, which occurs to me at the moment, and
reminds me of what I was going to say to you, that the fine
fashionable language of modern times has twisted and disguised and
entirely altered the original meaning both of deon, and also of
zemiodes, which in the old language is clearly indicated.

  Her. What do you mean?

  Soc. I will try to explain. You are aware that our forefathers loved
the sounds i and d, especially the women, who are most conservative of
the ancient language, but now they change i into e (long) or e
(short), and d into z; this is supposed to increase the grandeur of
the sound.

  Her. How do you mean?

  Soc. For example, in very ancient times they called the day either
imera or emera (short e), which is called by us emera (long e).

  Her. That is true.

  Soc. Do you observe that only the ancient form shows the intention
of the giver of the name? of which the reason is, that men long for
(imeirousi) and love the light which comes after the darkness, and
is therefore called imera, from imeros, desire.

  Her. Clearly.

  Soc. But now the name is so travestied that you cannot tell the
meaning, although there are some who imagine the day to be called
emuera because it makes things gentle (emera).

  Her. Such is my view.

  Soc. And do you know that the ancients said dougon and not zugon?

  Her. They did so.

  Soc. And zugon (yoke) has no meaning,- it ought to be duogon,
which word expresses the binding of two together (duein agoge) for the
purpose of drawing;- this has been changed into zugon, and there are
many other examples of similar changes.

  Her. There are.

  Soc. Proceeding in the same train of thought I may remark that the
word deon (obligation) has a meaning which is the opposite of all
the other appellations of good; for deon is here a species of good,
and is, nevertheless, the chain (desmos) or hinderer of motion, and
therefore own brother of blaberon.

  Her. Yes, Socrates; that is quite plain.

  Soc. Not if you restore the ancient form, which is more likely to be
the correct one, and read dion instead of deon; if you convert the e
into an i after the old fashion, this word will then agree with
other words meaning good; for dion, not deon, signifies the good,
and is a term of praise; and the author of names has not
contradicted himself, but in all these various appellations, deon
(obligatory), ophelimon (advantageous), lusiteloun (profitable),
kerdaleon (gainful), agathon (good), sumpheron (expedient), euporon
(plenteous), the same conception is implied of the ordering or
all-pervading principle which is praised, and the restraining and
binding principle which is censured. And this is further illustrated
by the word zemiodes (hurtful), which if the z is only changed into
d as in the ancient language, becomes demiodes; and this name, as
you will perceive, is given to that which binds motion (dounti ion).

  Her. What do you say of edone (pleasure), lupe (pain), epithumia
(desire), and the like, Socrates?

  Soc. I do not think, Hermogenes, that there is any great
difficulty about them- edone is e onesis, the action which tends to
advantage; and the original form may be supposed to have been eone,
but this has been altered by the insertion of the d. Lupe appears to
be derived from the relaxation (luein) which the body feels when in
sorrow; ania (trouble) is the hindrance of motion (a and ienai);
algedon (distress), if I am not mistaken, is a foreign word, which
is derived from aleinos (grievous); odune (grief) is called from the
putting on (endusis) sorrow; in achthedon (vexation) "the word too
labours," as any one may see; chara (joy) is the very expression of
the fluency and diffusion of the soul (cheo); terpsis (delight) is
so called from the pleasure creeping (erpon) through the soul, which
may be likened to a breath (pnoe) and is properly erpnoun, but has
been altered by time into terpnon; eupherosune (cheerfulness) and
epithumia explain themselves; the former, which ought to be
eupherosune and has been changed euphrosune, is named, as every one
may see, from the soul moving (pheresthai) in harmony with nature;
epithumia is really e epi ton thumon iousa dunamis, the power which
enters into the soul; thumos (passion) is called from the rushing
(thuseos) and boiling of the soul; imeros (desire) denotes the
stream (rous) which most draws the soul dia ten esin tes roes- because
flowing with desire (iemenos), and expresses a longing after things
and violent attraction of the soul to them, and is termed imeros
from possessing this power; pothos (longing) is expressive of the
desire of that which is not present but absent, and in another place
(pou); this is the reason why the name pothos is applied to things
absent, as imeros is to things present; eros (love) is so called
because flowing in (esron) from without; the stream is not inherent,
but is an influence introduced through the eyes, and from flowing in
was called esros (influx) in the old time when they used o (short) for
o (long), and is called eros, now that o (long) is substituted for o
(short). But why do you not give me another word?

  Her. What do you think of doxa (opinion), and that class of words?

  Soc. Doxa is either derived from dioxis (pursuit), and expresses the
march of the soul in the pursuit of knowledge, or from the shooting of
a bow (toxon); the latter is more likely, and is confirmed by oiesis
(thinking), which is only oisis (moving), and implies the movement
of the soul to the essential nature of each thing- just as boule
(counsel) has to do with shooting (bole); and boulesthai (to wish)
combines the notion of aiming and deliberating- all these words seem
to follow doxa, and all involve the idea of shooting, just as aboulia,
absence of counsel, on the other hand, is a mishap, or missing, or
mistaking of the mark, or aim, or proposal, or object.

  Her. You are quickening your pace now, Socrates.

  Soc. Why yes, the end I now dedicate to God, not, however, until I
have explained anagke (necessity), which ought to come next, and
ekousion (the voluntary). Ekousion is certainly the yielding (eikon)
and unresisting- the notion implied is yielding and not opposing,
yielding, as I was just now saying, to that motion which is in
accordance with our will; but the necessary and resistant being
contrary to our will, implies error and ignorance; the idea is taken
from walking through a ravine which is impassable, and rugged, and
overgrown, and impedes motion- and this is the derivation of the
word anagkaion (necessary) an agke ion, going through a ravine. But
while my strength lasts let us persevere, and I hope that you will
persevere with your questions.

  Her. Well, then, let me ask about the greatest and noblest, such
as aletheia (truth) and pseudos (falsehood) and on (being), not
forgetting to enquire why the word onoma (name), which is the theme of
our discussion, has this name of onoma.

  Soc. You know the word maiesthai (to seek)?

  Her. Yes;- meaning the same as zetein (to enquire).

  Soc. The word onoma seems to be a compressed sentence, signifying on
ou zetema (being for which there is a search); as is still more
obvious in onomaston (notable), which states in so many words that
real existence is that for which there is a seeking (on ou masma);
aletheia is also an agglomeration of theia ale (divine wandering),
implying the divine motion of existence; pseudos (falsehood) is the
opposite of motion; here is another ill name given by the legislator
to stagnation and forced inaction, which he compares to sleep
(eudein); but the original meaning of the word is disguised by the
addition of ps; on and ousia are ion with an i broken off; this agrees
with the true principle, for being (on) is also moving (ion), and
the same may be said of not being, which is likewise called not
going (oukion or ouki on = ouk ion).

  Her. You have hammered away at them manfully; but suppose that
some one were to say to you, what is the word ion, and what are reon
and doun?- show me their fitness.

  Soc. You mean to say, how should I answer him?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. One way of giving the appearance of an answer has been
already suggested.

  Her. What way?

  Soc. To say that names which we do not understand are of foreign
origin; and this is very likely the right answer, and something of
this kind may be true of them; but also the original forms of words
may have been lost in the lapse of ages; names have been so twisted in
all manner of ways, that I should not be surprised if the old language
when compared with that now in use would appear to us to be a
barbarous tongue.

  Her. Very likely.

  Soc. Yes, very likely. But still the enquiry demands our earnest
attention and we must not flinch. For we should remember, that if a
person go on analysing names into words, and enquiring also into the
elements out of which the words are formed, and keeps on always
repeating this process, he who has to answer him must at last give
up the enquiry in despair.

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. And at what point ought he to lose heart and give up the
enquiry? Must he not stop when he comes to the names which are the
elements of all other names and sentences; for these cannot be
supposed to be made up of other names? The word agathon (good), for
example, is, as we were saying, a compound of agastos (admirable)
and thoos (swift). And probably thoos is made up of other elements,
and these again of others. But if we take a word which is incapable of
further resolution, then we shall be right in saying that we have at
last reached a primary element, which need not be resolved any
further.

  Her. I believe you to be in the right.

  Soc. And suppose the names about which you are now asking should
turn out to be primary elements, must not their truth or law be
examined according to some new method?

  Her. Very likely.

  Soc. Quite so, Hermogenes; all that has preceded would lead to
this conclusion. And if, as I think, the conclusion is true, then I
shall again say to you, come and help me, that I may not fall into
some absurdity in stating the principle of primary names.

  Her. Let me hear, and I will do my best to assist you.

  Soc. I think that you will acknowledge with me, that one principle
is applicable to all names, primary as well as secondary- when they
are regarded simply as names, there is no difference in them.

  Her. Certainly not.

  Soc. All the names that we have been explaining were intended to
indicate the nature of things.

  Her. Of course.

  Soc. And that this is true of the primary quite as much as of the
secondary names, is implied in their being names.

  Her. Surely.

  Soc. But the secondary, as I conceive, derive their significance
from the primary.

  Her. That is evident.

  Soc. Very good; but then how do the primary names which precede
analysis show the natures of things, as far as they can be shown;
which they must do, if they are to be real names? And here I will
ask you a question: Suppose that we had no voice or tongue, and wanted
to communicate with one another, should we not, like the deaf and
dumb, make signs with the hands and head and the rest of the body?

  Her. There would be no choice, Socrates.

  Soc. We should imitate the nature of the thing; the elevation of our
hands to heaven would mean lightness and upwardness; heaviness and
downwardness would be expressed by letting them drop to the ground; if
we were describing the running of a horse, or any other animal, we
should make our bodies and their gestures as like as we could to them.

  Her. I do not see that we could do anything else.

  Soc. We could not; for by bodily imitation only can the body ever
express anything.

  Her. Very true.

  Soc. And when we want to express ourselves, either with the voice,
or tongue, or mouth, the expression is simply their imitation of
that which we want to express.

  Her. It must be so, I think.

  Soc. Then a name is a vocal imitation of that which the vocal
imitator names or imitates?

  Her. I think so.

  Soc. Nay, my friend, I am disposed to think that we have not reached
the truth as yet.

  Her. Why not?

  Soc. Because if we have we shall be obliged to admit that the people
who imitate sheep, or cocks, or other animals, name that which they
imitate.

  Her. Quite true.

  Soc. Then could I have been right in what I was saying?

  Her. In my opinion, no. But I wish that you would tell me, Socrates,
what sort of an imitation is a name?

  Soc. In the first place, I should reply, not a musical imitation,
although that is also vocal; nor, again, an imitation of what music
imitates; these, in my judgment, would not be naming. Let me put the
matter as follows: All objects have sound and figure, and many have
colour?

  Her. Certainly.

  Soc. But the art of naming appears not to be concerned with
imitations of this kind; the arts which have to do with them are music
and drawing?

  Her. True.

  Soc. Again, is there not an essence of each thing, just as there
is a colour, or sound? And is there not an essence of colour and sound
as well as of anything else which may be said to have an essence?

  Her. I should think so.

  Soc. Well, and if any one could express the essence of each thing in
letters and syllables, would he not express the nature of each thing?

  Her. Quite so.

  Soc. The musician and the painter were the two names which you
gave to the two other imitators. What will this imitator be called?

  Her. I imagine, Socrates, that he must be the namer, or
name-giver, of whom we are in search.

  Soc. If this is true, then I think that we are in a condition to
consider the names ron (stream), ienai (to go), schesis (retention),
about which you were asking; and we may see whether the namer has
grasped the nature of them in letters and syllables in such a manner
as to imitate the essence or not.

  Her. Very good.

  Soc. But are these the only primary names, or are there others?

  Her. There must be others.

  Soc. So I should expect. But how shall we further analyse them,
and where does the imitator begin? Imitation of the essence is made by
syllables and letters; ought we not, therefore, first to separate
the letters, just as those who are beginning rhythm first
distinguish the powers of elementary, and then of compound sounds, and
when they have done so, but not before, they proceed to the
consideration of rhythms?

  Her. Yes.

  Soc. Must we not begin in the same way with letters; first
separating the vowels, and then the consonants and mutes, into
classes, according to the received distinctions of the learned; also
the semivowels, which are neither vowels, nor yet mutes; and
distinguishing into classes the vowels themselves? And when we have
perfected the classification of things, we shall give their names, and
see whether, as in the case of letters, there are any classes to which
they may be all referred; hence we shall see their natures, and see,
too, whether they have in them classes as there are in the letters;
and when we have well considered all this, we shall know how to
apply them to what they resemble-  whether one letter is used to
denote one thing, or whether there is to be an admixture of several of
them; just, as in painting, the painter who wants to depict anything
sometimes uses purple only, or any other colour, and sometimes mixes
up several colours, as his method is when he has to paint flesh colour
or anything of that kind- he uses his colours as his figures appear to
require them; and so, too, we shall apply letters to the expression of
objects, either single letters when required, or several letters;
and so we shall form syllables, as they are called, and from syllables
make nouns and verbs; and thus, at last, from the combinations of
nouns and verbs arrive at language, large and fair and whole; and as
the painter made a figure, even so shall we make speech by the art
of the namer or the rhetorician, or by some other art. Not that I am
literally speaking of ourselves, but I was carried away- meaning to
say that this was the way in which (not we but) the ancients formed
language, and what they put together we must take to pieces in like
manner, if we are to attain a scientific view of the whole subject,
and we must see whether the primary, and also whether the secondary
elements are rightly given or not, for if they are not, the
composition of them, my dear Hermogenes, will be a sorry piece of
work, and in the wrong direction.

  Her. That, Socrates, I can quite believe.

  Soc. Well, but do you suppose that you will be able to analyse
them in this way? for I am certain that I should not.

  Her. Much less am I likely to be able.

  Soc. Shall we leave them, then? or shall we seek to discover, if
we can, something about them, according to the measure of our ability,
saying by way of preface, as I said before of the Gods, that of the
truth about them we know nothing, and do but entertain human notions
of them. And in this present enquiry, let us say to ourselves,
before we proceed, that the higher method is the one which we or
others who would analyse language to any good purpose must follow; but
under the circumstances, as men say, we must do as well as we can.
What do you think?

  Her. I very much approve.

  Soc. That objects should be imitated in letters and syllables, and
so find expression, may appear ridiculous, Hermogenes, but it cannot
be avoided- there is no better principle to which we can look for
the truth of first names. Deprived of this, we must have recourse to
divine help, like the tragic poets, who in any perplexity have their
Gods waiting in the air; and must get out of our difficulty in like
fashion, by saying that "the Gods gave the first names, and
therefore they are right." This will be the best contrivance, or
perhaps that other notion may be even better still, of deriving them
from some barbarous people, for the barbarians are older than we
are; or we may say that antiquity has cast a veil over them, which
is the same sort of excuse as the last; for all these are not
reasons but only ingenious excuses for having no reasons concerning
the truth of words. And yet any sort of ignorance of first or
primitive names involves an ignorance of secondary words; for they can
only be explained by the primary. Clearly then the professor of
languages should be able to give a very lucid explanation of first
names, or let him be assured he will only talk nonsense about the
rest. Do you not suppose this to be true?

  Her. Certainly, Socrates.

  Soc. My first notions of original names are truly wild and
ridiculous, though I have no objection to impart them to you if you
desire, and I hope that you will communicate to me in return
anything better which you may have.

  Her. Fear not; I will do my best.

  Soc. In the first place, the letter r; appears to me to be the
general instrument expressing all motion (kinesis). But I have not yet
explained the meaning of this latter word, which is just iesis
(going); for the letter e (long) was not in use among the ancients,
who only employed e (short); and the root is kiein, which is a foreign
form, the same as ienai. And the old word kinesis will be correctly
given as iesis in corresponding modern letters. Assuming this
foreign root kiein, and allowing for the change of the e and the
insertion of the n, we have kinesis, which should have been kieinsis
or eisis; and stasis is the negative of ienai (or eisis), and has been
improved into stasis. Now the letter r, as I was saying, appeared to
the imposer of names an excellent instrument for the expression of
motion; and he frequently uses the letter for this purpose: for
example, in the actual words rein and roe he represents motion by r;
also in the words tromos (trembling), trachus (rugged); and again,
in words such as krouein (strike), thrauein (crush), ereikein
(bruise), thruptein (break), kermatixein (crumble), rumbein (whirl):
of all these sorts of movements he generally finds an expression in
the letter r, because, as I imagine, he had observed that the tongue
was most agitated and least at rest in the pronunciation of this
letter, which he therefore used in order to express motion, just as by
the letter i he expresses the subtle elements which pass through all
things. This is why he uses the letter i as imitative of motion,
ienai, iesthai. And there is another class of letters, ph, ps, s,
and x, of which the pronunciation is accompanied by great
expenditure of breath; these are used in the imitation of such notions
as psuchron (shivering), xeon (seething), seiesthai, (to be shaken),
seismos (shock), and are always introduced by the giver of names
when he wants to imitate what is phusodes (windy). He seems to have
thought that the closing and pressure of the tongue in the utterance
of d and t was expressive of binding and rest in a place: he further
observed the liquid movement of l, in the pronunciation of which the
tongue slips, and in this he found the expression of smoothness, as in
leios (level), and in the word oliothanein (to slip) itself, liparon
(sleek), in the word kollodes (gluey), and the like: the heavier sound
of g detained the slipping tongue, and the union of the two gave the
notion of a glutinous clammy nature, as in glischros, glukus,
gloiodes. The n he observed to be sounded from within, and therefore
to have a notion of inwardness; hence he introduced the sound in endos
and entos: a he assigned to the expression of size, and n of length,
because they are great letters: o was the sign of roundness, and
therefore there is plenty of o mixed up in the word goggulon
(round). Thus did the legislator, reducing all things into letters and
syllables, and impressing on them names and signs, and out of them
by imitation compounding other signs. That is my view, Hermogenes,
of the truth of names; but I should like to hear what Cratylus has
more to say.

  Her. But, Socrates, as I was telling you before, Cratylus
mystifies me; he says that there is a fitness of names, but he never
explains what is this fitness, so that I cannot tell whether his
obscurity is intended or not. Tell me now, Cratylus, here in the
presence of Socrates, do you agree in what Socrates has been saying
about names, or have you something better of your own? and if you
have, tell me what your view is, and then you will either learn of
Socrates, or Socrates and I will learn of you.

  Crat. Well, but surely, Hermogenes, you do not suppose that you
can learn, or I explain, any subject of importance all in a moment; at
any rate, not such a subject as language, which is, perhaps, the
very greatest of all.

  Her. No, indeed; but, as Hesiod says, and I agree with him, "to
add little to little" is worth while. And, therefore, if you think
that you can add anything at all, however small, to our knowledge,
take a little trouble and oblige Socrates, and me too, who certainly
have a claim upon you.

  Soc. I am by no means positive, Cratylus, in the view which
Hermogenes and myself have worked out; and therefore do not hesitate
to say what you think, which if it be better than my own view shall
gladly accept. And I should not be at all surprised to find that you
have found some better notion. For you have evidently reflected on
these matters and have had teachers, and if you have really a better
theory of the truth of names, you may count me in the number of your
disciples.

  Crat. You are right, Socrates, in saying that I have made a study of
these matters, and I might possibly convert you into a disciple. But I
fear that the opposite is more probable, and I already find myself
moved to say to you what Achilles in the "Prayers" says to Ajax-

     Illustrious Ajax, son of Telamon, lord of the people,

     You appear to have spoken in all things much to my mind.

And you, Socrates, appear to me to be an oracle, and to give answers
much to my whether you are inspired by Euthyphro, or whether some Muse
may have long been an inhabitant of your breast, unconsciously to
yourself.

  Soc. Excellent Cratylus, I have long been wondering at my own
wisdom; I cannot trust myself. And I think that I ought to stop and
ask myself What am I saying? for there is nothing worse than
self-deception- when the deceiver is always at home and always with
you- it is quite terrible, and therefore I ought often to retrace my
steps and endeavour to "look fore and aft," in the words of the
aforesaid Homer. And now let me see; where are we? Have we not been
saying that the correct name indicates the nature of the thing:- has
this proposition been sufficiently proven?

  Crat. Yes, Socrates, what you say, as I am disposed to think, is
quite true.

  Soc. Names, then, are given in order to instruct?

  Crat. Certainly.

  Soc. And naming is an art, and has artificers?

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. And who are they?

  Crat. The legislators, of whom you spoke at first.

  Soc. And does this art grow up among men like other arts? Let me
explain what I mean: of painters, some are better and some worse?

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. The better painters execute their works, I mean their
figures, better, and the worse execute them worse; and of builders
also, the better sort build fairer houses, and the worse build them
worse.

  Crat. True.

  Soc. And among legislators, there are some who do their work
better and some worse?

  Crat. No; there I do not agree with you.

  Soc. Then you do not think that some laws are better and others
worse?

  Crat. No, indeed.

  Soc. Or that one name is better than another?

  Crat. Certainly not.

  Soc. Then all names are rightly imposed?

  Crat. Yes, if they are names at all.

  Soc. Well, what do you say to the name of our friend Hermogenes,
which was mentioned before:- assuming that he has nothing of the
nature of Hermes in him, shall we say that this is a wrong name, or
not his name at all?

  Crat. I should reply that Hermogenes is not his name at all, but
only appears to be his, and is really the name of somebody else, who
has the nature which corresponds to it.

  Soc. And if a man were to call him Hermogenes, would he not be
even speaking falsely? For there may be a doubt whether you can call
him Hermogenes, if he is not.

  Crat. What do you mean?

  Soc. Are you maintaining that falsehood is impossible? For if this
is your meaning I should answer, that there have been plenty of
liars in all ages.

  Crat. Why, Socrates, how can a man say that which is not?- say
something and yet say nothing? For is not falsehood saying the thing
which is not?

  Soc. Your argument, friend, is too subtle for a man of my age. But I
should like to know whether you are one of those philosophers who
think that falsehood may be spoken but not said?

  Crat. Neither spoken nor said.

  Soc. Nor uttered nor addressed? For example: If a person, saluting
you in a foreign country, were to take your hand and say: "Hail,
Athenian stranger, Hermogenes, son of Smicrion"- these words,
whether spoken, said, uttered, or addressed, would have no application
to you but only to our friend Hermogenes, or perhaps to nobody at all?

  Crat. In my opinion, Socrates, the speaker would only be talking
nonsense.

  Soc. Well, but that will be quite enough for me, if you will tell me
whether the nonsense would be true or false, or partly true and partly
false:- which is all that I want to know.

  Crat. I should say that he would be putting himself in motion to
no purpose; and that his words would be an unmeaning sound like the
noise of hammering at a brazen pot.

  Soc. But let us see, Cratylus, whether we cannot find a
meeting-point, for you would admit that the name is not the same
with the thing named?

  Crat. I should.

  Soc. And would you further acknowledge that the name is an imitation
of the thing?

  Crat. Certainly.

  Soc. And you would say that pictures are also imitations of
things, but in another way?

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. I believe you may be right, but I do not rightly understand
you. Please to say, then, whether both sorts of imitation (I mean both
pictures or words) are not equally attributable and applicable to
the things of which they are the imitation.

  Crat. They are.

  Soc. First look at the matter thus: you may attribute the likeness
of the man to the man, and of the woman to the woman; and so on?

  Crat. Certainly.

  Soc. And conversely you may attribute the likeness of the man to the
woman, and of the woman to the man?

  Crat. Very true.

  Soc. And are both modes of assigning them right, or only the first?

  Crat. Only the first.

  Soc. That is to say, the mode of assignment which attributes to each
that which belongs to them and is like them?

  Crat. That is my view.

  Soc. Now then, as I am desirous that we being friends should have
a good understanding about the argument, let me state my view to
you: the first mode of assignment, whether applied to figures or to
names, I call right, and when applied to names only, true as well as
right; and the other mode of giving and assigning the name which is
unlike, I call wrong, and in the case of names, false as well as
wrong.

  Crat. That may be true, Socrates, in the case of pictures; they
may be wrongly assigned; but not in the case of names- they must be
always right.

  Soc. Why, what is the difference? May I not go to a man and say to
him, "This is your picture," showing him his own likeness, or
perhaps the likeness of a woman; and when I say "show," I mean bring
before the sense of sight.

  Crat. Certainly.

  Soc. And may I not go to him again, and say, "This is your name"?-
for the name, like the picture, is an imitation. May I not say to him-
"This is your name"? and may I not then bring to his sense of
hearing the imitation of himself, when I say, "This is a man"; or of a
female of the human species, when I say, "This is a woman," as the
case may be? Is not all that quite possible?

  Crat. I would fain agree with you, Socrates; and therefore I say,
Granted.

  Soc. That is very good of you, if I am right, which need hardly be
disputed at present. But if I can assign names as well as pictures
to objects, the right assignment of them we may call truth, and the
wrong assignment of them falsehood. Now if there be such a wrong
assignment of names, there may also be a wrong or inappropriate
assignment of verbs; and if of names and verbs then of the
sentences, which are made up of them. What do you say, Cratylus?

  Crat. I agree; and think that what you say is very true.

  Soc. And further, primitive nouns may be compared to pictures, and
in pictures you may either give all the appropriate colours and
figures, or you may not give them all- some may be wanting; or there
may be too many or too much of them- may there not?

  Crat. Very true.

  Soc. And he who gives all gives a perfect picture or figure; and
he who takes away or adds also gives a picture or figure, but not a
good one.

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. In like manner, he who by syllables and letters imitates the
nature of things, if he gives all that is appropriate will produce a
good image, or in other words a name; but if he subtracts or perhaps
adds a little, he will make an image but not a good one; whence I
infer that some names are well and others ill made.

  Crat. That is true.

  Soc. Then the artist of names may be sometimes good, or he may be
bad?

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. And this artist of names is called the legislator?

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. Then like other artists the legislator may be good or he may be
bad; it must surely be so if our former admissions hold good?

  Crat. Very true, Socrates; but the case of language, you see, is
different; for when by the help of grammar we assign the letters a
or b, or any other letters to a certain name, then, if we add, or
subtract, or misplace a letter, the name which is written is not
only written wrongly, but not written at all; and in any of these
cases becomes other than a name.

  Soc. But I doubt whether your view is altogether correct, Cratylus.

  Crat. How so?

  Soc. I believe that what you say may be true about numbers, which
must be just what they are, or not be at all; for example, the
number ten at once becomes other than ten if a unit be added or
subtracted, and so of any other number: but this does not apply to
that which is qualitative or to anything which is represented under an
image. I should say rather that the image, if expressing in every
point the entire reality, would no longer be an image. Let us
suppose the existence of two objects: one of them shall be Cratylus,
and the other the image of Cratylus; and we will suppose, further,
that some God makes not only a representation such as a painter
would make of your outward form and colour, but also creates an inward
organization like yours, having the same warmth and softness; and into
this infuses motion, and soul, and mind, such as you have, in a word
copies all your qualities, and places them by you in another form;
would you say that this was Cratylus and the image of Cratylus, or
that there were two Cratyluses?

  Crat. I should say that there were two Cratyluses.

  Soc. Then you see, my friend, that we must find some other principle
of truth in images, and also in names; and not insist that an image is
no longer an image when something is added or subtracted. Do you not
perceive that images are very far from having qualities which are
the exact counterpart of the realities which they represent?

  Crat. Yes, I see.

  Soc. But then how ridiculous would be the effect of names on things,
if they were exactly the same with them! For they would be the doubles
of them, and no one would be able to determine which were the names
and which were the realities.

  Crat. Quite true.

  Soc. Then fear not, but have the courage to admit that one name
may be correctly and another incorrectly given; and do not insist that
the name shall be exactly the same with the thing; but allow the
occasional substitution of a wrong letter, and if of a letter also
of a noun in a sentence, and if of a noun in a sentence also of a
sentence which is not appropriate to the matter, and acknowledge
that the thing may be named, and described, so long as the general
character of the thing which you are describing is retained; and this,
as you will remember, was remarked by Hermogenes and myself in the
particular instance of the names of the letters.

  Crat. Yes, I remember.

  Soc. Good; and when the general character is preserved, even if some
of the proper letters are wanting, still the thing is signified;-
well, if all the letters are given; not well, when only a few of
them are given. I think that we had better admit this, lest we be
punished like travellers in Aegina who wander about the street late at
night: and be likewise told by truth herself that we have arrived
too late; or if not, you must find out some new notion of
correctness of names, and no longer maintain that a name is the
expression of a thing in letters or syllables; for if you say both,
you will be inconsistent with yourself.

  Crat. I quite acknowledge, Socrates, what you say to be very
reasonable.

  Soc. Then as we are agreed thus far, let us ask ourselves whether
a name rightly imposed ought not to have the proper letters.

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. And the proper letters are those which are like the things?

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. Enough then of names which are rightly given. And in names
which are incorrectly given, the greater part may be supposed to be
made up of proper and similar letters, or there would be no
likeness; but there will be likewise a part which is improper and
spoils the beauty and formation of the word: you would admit that?

  Crat. There would be no use, Socrates, in my quarrelling with you,
since I cannot be satisfied that a name which is incorrectly given
is a name at all.

  Soc. Do you admit a name to be the representation of a thing?

  Crat. Yes, I do.

  Soc. But do you not allow that some nouns are primitive, and some
derived?

  Crat. Yes, I do.

  Soc. Then if you admit that primitive or first nouns are
representations of things, is there any better way of framing
representations than by assimilating them to the objects as much as
you can; or do you prefer the notion of Hermogenes and of many others,
who say that names are conventional, and have a meaning to those who
have agreed about them, and who have previous knowledge of the
things intended by them, and that convention is the only principle;
and whether you abide by our present convention, or make a new and
opposite one, according to which you call small great and great small-
that, they would say, makes no difference, if you are only agreed.
Which of these two notions do you prefer?

  Crat. Representation by likeness, Socrates, is infinitely better
than representation by any chance sign.

  Soc. Very good: but if the name is to be like the thing, the letters
out of which the first names are composed must also be like things.
Returning to the image of the picture, I would ask, How could any
one ever compose a picture which would be like anything at all, if
there were not pigments in nature which resembled the things imitated,
and out of which the picture is composed?

  Crat. Impossible.

  Soc. No more could names ever resemble any actually existing
thing, unless the original elements of which they are compounded
bore some degree of resemblance to the objects of which the names
are the imitation: And the original elements are letters?

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. Let me now invite you to consider what Hermogenes and I were
saying about sounds. Do you agree with me that the letter r is
expressive of rapidity, motion, and hardness? Were we right or wrong
in saying so?

  Crat. I should say that you were right.

  Soc. And that l was expressive of smoothness, and softness, and
the like?

  Crat. There again you were right.

  Soc. And yet, as you are aware, that which is called by us
sklerotes, is by the Eretrians called skleroter.

  Crat. Very true.

  Soc. But are the letters r and s, equivalents; and is there the same
significance to them in the termination r, which there is to us in
s, or is there no significance to one of us?

  Crat. Nay, surely there is a significance to both of us.

  Soc. In as far as they are like, or in as far as they are unlike?

  Crat. In as far as they are like.

  Soc. Are they altogether alike?

  Crat. Yes; for the purpose of expressing motion.

  Soc. And what do you say of the insertion of the l? for that is
expressive not of hardness but of softness.

  Crat. Why, perhaps the letter l is wrongly inserted, Socrates, and
should be altered into r, as you were saying to Hermogenes and in my
opinion rightly, when you spoke of adding and subtracting letters upon
occasion.

  Soc. Good. But still the word is intelligible to both of us; when
I say skleros (hard), you know what I mean.

  Crat. Yes, my dear friend, and the explanation of that is custom.

  Soc. And what is custom but convention? I utter a sound which I
understand, and you know that I understand the meaning of the sound:
this is what you are saying?

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. And if when I speak you know my meaning, there is an indication
given by me to you?

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. This indication of my meaning may proceed from unlike as well
as from like, for example in the l of sklerotes. But if this is
true, then you have made a convention with yourself, and the
correctness of a name turns out to be convention, since letters
which are unlike are indicative equally with those which are like,
if they are sanctioned by custom and convention. And even supposing
that you distinguish custom from convention ever so much, still you
must say that the signification of words is given by custom and not by
likeness, for custom may indicate by the unlike as well as by the
like. But as we are agreed thus far, Cratylus (for I shall assume that
your silence gives consent), then custom and convention must be
supposed to contribute to the indication of our thoughts; for
suppose we take the instance of number, how can you ever imagine, my
good friend, that you will find names resembling every individual
number, unless you allow that which you term convention and
agreement to have authority in determining the correctness of names? I
quite agree with you that words should as far as possible resemble
things; but I fear that this dragging in of resemblance, as Hermogenes
says, is a shabby thing, which has to be supplemented by the
mechanical aid of convention with a view to correctness; for I believe
that if we could always, or almost always, use likenesses, which are
perfectly appropriate, this would be the most perfect state of
language; as the opposite is the most imperfect. But let me ask you,
what is the force of names, and what is the use of them?

  Crat. The use of names, Socrates, as I should imagine, is to inform:
the simple truth is, that he who knows names knows also the things
which are expressed by them.

  Soc. I suppose you mean to say, Cratylus, that as the name is, so
also is the thing; and that he who knows the one will also know the
other, because they are similars, and all similars fall under the same
art or science; and therefore you would say that he who knows names
will also know things.

  Crat. That is precisely what I mean.

  Soc. But let us consider what is the nature of this information
about things which, according to you, is given us by names. Is it
the best sort of information? or is there any other? What do you say?

  Crat. I believe that to be both the only and the best sort of
information about them; there can be no other.

  Soc. But do you believe that in the discovery of them, he who
discovers the names discovers also the things; or is this only the
method of instruction, and is there some other method of enquiry and
discovery.

  Crat. I certainly believe that the methods of enquiry and
discovery are of the same nature as instruction.

  Soc. Well, but do you not see, Cratylus, that he who follows names
in the search after things, and analyses their meaning, is in great
danger of being deceived?

  Crat. How so?

  Soc. Why clearly he who first gave names gave them according to
his conception of the things which they signified- did he not?

  Crat. True.

  Soc. And if his conception was erroneous, and he gave names
according to his conception, in what position shall we who are his
followers find ourselves? Shall we not be deceived by him?

  Crat. But, Socrates, am I not right in thinking that he must
surely have known; or else, as I was saying, his names would not be
names at all? And you have a clear proof that he has not missed the
truth, and the proof is- that he is perfectly consistent. Did you ever
observe in speaking that all the words which you utter have a common
character and purpose?

  Soc. But that, friend Cratylus, is no answer. For if he did begin in
error, he may have forced the remainder into agreement with the
original error and with himself; there would be nothing strange in
this, any more than in geometrical diagrams, which have often a slight
and invisible flaw in the first part of the process, and are
consistently mistaken in the long deductions which follow. And this is
the reason why every man should expend his chief thought and attention
on the consideration of his first principles:- are they or are they
not rightly laid down? and when he has duly sifted them, all the
rest will follow. Now I should be astonished to find that names are
really consistent. And here let us revert to our former discussion:
Were we not saying that all things are in motion and progress and
flux, and that this idea of motion is expressed by names? Do you not
conceive that to be the meaning of them?

  Crat. Yes; that is assuredly their meaning, and the true meaning.

  Soc. Let us revert to episteme (knowledge) and observe how ambiguous
this word is, seeming rather to signify stopping the soul at things
than going round with them; and therefore we should leave the
beginning as at present, and not reject the e, but make an insertion
of an instead of an i (not pioteme, but epiisteme). Take another
example: bebaion (sure) is clearly the expression of station and
position, and not of motion. Again, the word istoria (enquiry) bears
upon the face of it the stopping (istanai) of the stream; and the word
piston (faithful) certainly indicates cessation of motion; then,
again, mneme (memory), as any one may see, expresses rest in the soul,
and not motion. Moreover, words such as amartia and sumphora, which
have a bad sense, viewed in the light of their etymologies will be the
same as sunesis and episteme and other words which have a good sense
(i.e., omartein, sunienai, epesthai, sumphersthai) and much the same
may be said of amathia and akolaia, for amathia may be explained as
e ama theo iontos poreia, and akolasia as e akolouthia tois pragmasin.
Thus the names which in these instances we find to have the worst
sense, will turn out to be framed on the same principle as those which
have the best. And any one I believe who would take the trouble
might find many other examples in which the giver of names
indicates, not that things are in motion or progress, but that they
are at rest; which is the opposite of motion.

  Crat. Yes, Socrates, but observe; the greater number express motion.

  Soc. What of that, Cratylus? Are we to count them like votes? and is
correctness of names the voice of the majority? Are we to say of
whichever sort there are most, those are the true ones?

  Crat. No; that is not reasonable.

  Soc. Certainly not. But let us have done with this question and
proceed to another, about which I should like to know whether you
think with me. Were we not lately acknowledging that the first
givers of names in states, both Hellenic and barbarous, were the
legislators, and that the art which gave names was the art of the
legislator?

  Crat. Quite true.

  Soc. Tell me, then, did the first legislators, who were the givers
of the first names, know or not know the things which they named?

  Crat. They must have known, Socrates.

  Soc. Why, yes, friend Cratylus, they could hardly have been
ignorant.

  Crat. I should say not.

  Soc. Let us return to the point from which we digressed. You were
saying, if you remember, that he who gave names must have known the
things which he named; are you still of that opinion?

  Crat. I am.

  Soc. And would you say that the giver of the first names had also
a knowledge of the things which he named?

  Crat. I should.

  Soc. But how could he have learned or discovered things from names
if the primitive names were not yet given? For, if we are correct in
our view, the only way of learning and discovering things, is either
to discover names for ourselves or to learn them from others.

  Crat. I think that there is a good deal in what you say, Socrates.

  Soc. But if things are only to be known through names, how can we
suppose that the givers of names had knowledge, or were legislators
before there were names at all, and therefore before they could have
known them?

  Crat. I believe, Socrates, the true account of the matter to be,
that a power more than human gave things their first names, and that
the names which are thus given are necessarily their true names.

  Soc. Then how came the giver of the names, if he was an inspired
being or God, to contradict himself? For were we not saying just now
that he made some names expressive of rest and others of motion?
Were we mistaken?

  Crat. But I suppose one of the two not to be names at all.

  Soc. And which, then, did he make, my good friend; those which are
expressive of rest, or those which are expressive of motion? This is a
point which, as I said before, cannot be determined by counting them.

  Crat. No; not in that way, Socrates.

  Soc. But if this is a battle of names, some of them asserting that
they are like the truth, others contending that they are, how or by
what criterion are we to decide between them? For there are no other
names to which appeal can be made, but obviously recourse must be
had to another standard which, without employing names, will make
clear which of the two are right; and this must be a standard which
shows the truth of things.

  Crat. I agree.

  Soc. But if that is true, Cratylus, then I suppose that things may
be known without names?

  Crat. Clearly.

  Soc. But how would you expect to know them? What other way can there
be of knowing them, except the true and natural way, through their
affinities, when they are akin to each other, and through
themselves? For that which is other and different from them must
signify something other and different from them.

  Crat. What you are saying is, I think, true.

  Soc. Well, but reflect; have we not several times acknowledged
that names rightly given are the likenesses and images of the things
which they name?

  Crat. Yes.

  Soc. Let us suppose that to any extent you please you can learn
things through the medium of names, and suppose also that you can
learn them from the things themselves- which is likely to be the
nobler and clearer way to learn of the image, whether the image and
the truth of which the image is the expression have been rightly
conceived, or to learn of the truth whether the truth and the image of
it have been duly executed?

  Crat. I should say that we must learn of the truth.

  Soc. How real existence is to be studied or discovered is, I
suspect, beyond you and me. But we may admit so much, that the
knowledge of things is not to be derived from names. No; they must
be studied and investigated in themselves.

  Crat. Clearly, Socrates.

  Soc. There is another point. I should not like us to be imposed upon
by the appearance of such a multitude of names, all tending in the
same direction. I myself do not deny that the givers of names did
really give them under the idea that all things were in motion and
flux; which was their sincere but, I think, mistaken opinion. And
having fallen into a kind of whirlpool themselves, they are carried
round, and want to drag us in after them. There is a matter, master
Cratylus, about which I often dream, and should like to ask your
opinion: Tell me, whether there is or is not any absolute beauty or
good, or any other absolute existence?

  Crat. Certainly, Socrates, I think so.

  Soc. Then let us seek the true beauty: not asking whether a face
is fair, or anything of that sort, for all such things appear to be in
a flux; but let us ask whether the true beauty is not always
beautiful.

  Crat. Certainly.

  Soc. And can we rightly speak of a beauty which is always passing
away, and is first this and then that; must not the same thing be born
and retire and vanish while the word is in our mouths?

  Crat. Undoubtedly.

  Soc. Then how can that be a real thing which is never in the same
state? I for obviously things which are the same cannot change while
they remain the same; and if they are always the same and in the
same state, and never depart from their original form, they can
never change or be moved.

  Crat. Certainly they cannot.

  Soc. Nor yet can they be known by any one; for at the moment that
the observer approaches, then they become other and of another nature,
so that you cannot get any further in knowing their nature or state,
for you cannot know that which has no state.

  Crat. True.

  Soc. Nor can we reasonably say, Cratylus, that there is knowledge at
all, if everything is in a state of transition and there is nothing
abiding; for knowledge too cannot continue to be knowledge unless
continuing always to abide and exist. But if the very nature of
knowledge changes, at the time when the change occurs there will be no
knowledge; and if the transition is always going on, there will always
be no knowledge, and, according to this view, there will be no one
to know and nothing to be known: but if that which knows and that
which is known exist ever, and the beautiful and the good and every
other thing also exist, then I do not think that they can resemble a
process or flux, as we were just now supposing. Whether there is
this eternal nature in things, or whether the truth is what
Heracleitus and his followers and many others say, is a question
hard to determine; and no man of sense will like to put himself or the
education of his mind in the power of names: neither will he so far
trust names or the givers of names as to be confident in any knowledge
which condemns himself and other existences to an unhealthy state of
unreality; he will not believe that all things leak like a pot, or
imagine that the world is a man who has a running at the nose. This
may be true, Cratylus, but is also very likely to be untrue; and
therefore I would not have you be too easily persuaded of it.
Reflect well and like a man, and do not easily accept such a doctrine;
for you are young and of an age to learn. And when you have found
the truth, come and tell me.

  Crat. I will do as you say, though I can assure you, Socrates,
that I have been considering the matter already, and the result of a
great deal of trouble and consideration is that I incline to
Heracleitus.

  Soc. Then, another day, my friend, when you come back, you shall
give me a lesson; but at present, go into the country, as you are
intending, and Hermogenes shall set you on your way.

  Crat. Very good, Socrates; I hope, however, that you will continue
to think about these things yourself.

                             -THE END-



  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: CRITIAS; HERMOCRATES; TIMAEUS; SOCRATES

  Timaeus. How thankful I am, Socrates, that I have arrived at last,
and, like a weary traveller after a long journey, may be at rest!
And I pray the being who always was of old, and has now been by me
revealed, to grant that my words may endure in so far as they have
been spoken truly and acceptably to him; but if unintentionally I have
said anything wrong, I pray that he will impose upon me a just
retribution, and the just retribution of him who errs is that he
should be set right. Wishing, then, to speak truly in future
concerning the generation of the gods, I pray him to give me
knowledge, which of all medicines is the most perfect and best. And
now having offered my prayer I deliver up the argument to Critias, who
is to speak next according to our agreement.

  Critias. And I, Timaeus, accept the trust, and as you at first
said that you were going to speak of high matters, and begged that
some forbearance might be shown to you, I too ask the same or
greater forbearance for what I am about to say. And although I very
well know that my request may appear to be somewhat and
discourteous, I must make it nevertheless. For will any man of sense
deny that you have spoken well? I can only attempt to show that I
ought to have more indulgence than you, because my theme is more
difficult; and I shall argue that to seem to speak well of the gods to
men is far easier than to speak well of men to men: for the
inexperience and utter ignorance of his hearers about any subject is a
great assistance to him who has to speak of it, and we know how
ignorant we are concerning the gods. But I should like to make my
meaning clearer, if Timaeus, you will follow me. All that is said by
any of us can only be imitation and representation. For if we consider
the likenesses which painters make of bodies divine and heavenly,
and the different degrees of gratification with which the eye of the
spectator receives them, we shall see that we are satisfied with the
artist who is able in any degree to imitate the earth and its
mountains, and the rivers, and the woods, and the universe, and the
things that are and move therein, and further, that knowing nothing
precise about such matters, we do not examine or analyze the painting;
all that is required is a sort of indistinct and deceptive mode of
shadowing them forth. But when a person endeavours to paint the
human form we are quick at finding out defects, and our familiar
knowledge makes us severe judges of any one who does not render
every point of similarity. And we may observe the same thing to happen
in discourse; we are satisfied with a picture of divine and heavenly
things which has very little likeness to them; but we are more precise
in our criticism of mortal and human things. Wherefore if at the
moment of speaking I cannot suitably express my meaning, you must
excuse me, considering that to form approved likenesses of human
things is the reverse of easy. This is what I want to suggest to
you, and at the same time to beg, Socrates, that I may have not
less, but more indulgence conceded to me in what I am about to say.
Which favour, if I am right in asking, I hope that you will be ready
to grant.

  Socrates. Certainly, Critias, we will grant your request, and we
will grant the same by anticipation to Hermocrates, as well as to
you and Timaeus; for I have no doubt that when his turn comes a little
while hence, he will make the same request which you have made. In
order, then, that he may provide himself with a fresh beginning, and
not be compelled to say the same things over again, let him understand
that the indulgence is already extended by anticipation to him. And
now, friend Critias, I will announce to you the judgment of the
theatre. They are of opinion that the last performer was wonderfully
successful, and that you will need a great deal of indulgence before
you will be able to take his place.

  Hermocrates. The warning, Socrates, which you have addressed to him,
I must also take to myself. But remember, Critias, that faint heart
never yet raised a trophy; and therefore you must go and attack the
argument like a man. First invoke Apollo and the Muses, and then let
us hear you sound the praises and show forth the virtues of your
ancient citizens.

  Crit. Friend Hermocrates, you, who are stationed last and have
another in front of you, have not lost heart as yet; the gravity of
the situation will soon be revealed to you; meanwhile I accept your
exhortations and encouragements. But besides the gods and goddesses
whom you have mentioned, I would specially invoke Mnemosyne; for all
the important part of my discourse is dependent on her favour, and
if I can recollect and recite enough of what was said by the priests
and brought hither by Solon, I doubt not that I shall satisfy the
requirements of this theatre. And now, making no more excuses, I
will proceed.

  Let me begin by observing first of all, that nine thousand was the
sum of years which had elapsed since the war which was said to have
taken place between those who dwelt outside the Pillars of Heracles
and all who dwelt within them; this war I am going to describe. Of the
combatants on the one side, the city of Athens was reported to have
been the leader and to have fought out the war; the combatants on
the other side were commanded by the kings of Atlantis, which, as
was saying, was an island greater in extent than Libya and Asia, and
when afterwards sunk by an earthquake, became an impassable barrier of
mud to voyagers sailing from hence to any part of the ocean. The
progress of the history will unfold the various nations of
barbarians and families of Hellenes which then existed, as they
successively appear on the scene; but I must describe first of all
Athenians of that day, and their enemies who fought with them, and
then the respective powers and governments of the two kingdoms. Let us
give the precedence to Athens.

  In the days of old the gods had the whole earth distributed among
them by allotment. There was no quarrelling; for you cannot rightly
suppose that the gods did not know what was proper for each of them to
have, or, knowing this, that they would seek to procure for themselves
by contention that which more properly belonged to others. They all of
them by just apportionment obtained what they wanted, and peopled
their own districts; and when they had peopled them they tended us,
their nurselings and possessions, as shepherds tend their flocks,
excepting only that they did not use blows or bodily force, as
shepherds do, but governed us like pilots from the stern of the
vessel, which is an easy way of guiding animals, holding our souls
by the rudder of persuasion according to their own pleasure;-thus
did they guide all mortal creatures. Now different gods had their
allotments in different places which they set in order. Hephaestus and
Athene, who were brother and sister, and sprang from the same
father, having a common nature, and being united also in the love of
philosophy and art, both obtained as their common portion this land,
which was naturally adapted for wisdom and virtue; and there they
implanted brave children of the soil, and put into their minds the
order of government; their names are preserved, but their actions have
disappeared by reason of the destruction of those who received the
tradition, and the lapse of ages. For when there were any survivors,
as I have already said, they were men who dwelt in the mountains;
and they were ignorant of the art of writing, and had heard only the
names of the chiefs of the land, but very little about their
actions. The names they were willing enough to give to their children;
but the virtues and the laws of their predecessors, they knew only
by obscure traditions; and as they themselves and their children
lacked for many generations the necessaries of life, they directed
their attention to the supply of their wants, and of them they
conversed, to the neglect of events that had happened in times long
past; for mythology and the enquiry into antiquity are first
introduced into cities when they begin to have leisure, and when
they see that the necessaries of life have already been provided,
but not before. And this is reason why the names of the ancients
have been preserved to us and not their actions. This I infer
because Solon said that the priests in their narrative of that war
mentioned most of the names which are recorded prior to the time of
Theseus, such as Cecrops, and Erechtheus, and Erichthonius, and
Erysichthon, and the names of the women in like manner. Moreover,
since military pursuits were then common to men and women, the men
of those days in accordance with the custom of the time set up a
figure and image of the goddess in full armour, to be a testimony that
all animals which associate together, male as well as female, may,
if they please, practise in common the virtue which belongs to them
without distinction of sex.

  Now the country was inhabited in those days by various classes of
citizens;-there were artisans, and there were husbandmen, and there
was also a warrior class originally set apart by divine men. The
latter dwelt by themselves, and had all things suitable for nurture
and education; neither had any of them anything of their own, but they
regarded all that they had as common property; nor did they claim to
receive of the other citizens anything more than their necessary food.
And they practised all the pursuits which we yesterday described as
those of our imaginary guardians. Concerning the country the
Egyptian priests said what is not only probable but manifestly true,
that the boundaries were in those days fixed by the Isthmus, and
that in the direction of the continent they extended as far as the
heights of Cithaeron and Parnes; the boundary line came down in the
direction of the sea, having the district of Oropus on the right,
and with the river Asopus as the limit on the left. The land was the
best in the world, and was therefore able in those days to support a
vast army, raised from the surrounding people. Even the remnant of
Attica which now exists may compare with any region in the world for
the variety and excellence of its fruits and the suitableness of its
pastures to every sort of animal, which proves what I am saying; but
in those days the country was fair as now and yielded far more
abundant produce. How shall I establish my words? and what part of
it can be truly called a remnant of the land that then was? The
whole country is only a long promontory extending far into the sea
away from the rest of the continent, while the surrounding basin of
the sea is everywhere deep in the neighbourhood of the shore. Many
great deluges have taken place during the nine thousand years, for
that is the number of years which have elapsed since the time of which
I am speaking; and during all this time and through so many changes,
there has never been any considerable accumulation of the soil
coming down from the mountains, as in other places, but the earth
has fallen away all round and sunk out of sight. The consequence is,
that in comparison of what then was, there are remaining only the
bones of the wasted body, as they may be called, as in the case of
small islands, all the richer and softer parts of the soil having
fallen away, and the mere skeleton of the land being left. But in
the primitive state of the country, its mountains were high hills
covered with soil, and the plains, as they are termed by us, of
Phelleus were full of rich earth, and there was abundance of wood in
the mountains. Of this last the traces still remain, for although some
of the mountains now only afford sustenance to bees, not so very
long ago there were still to be seen roofs of timber cut from trees
growing there, which were of a size sufficient to cover the largest
houses; and there were many other high trees, cultivated by man and
bearing abundance of food for cattle. Moreover, the land reaped the
benefit of the annual rainfall, not as now losing the water which
flows off the bare earth into the sea, but, having an abundant
supply in all places, and receiving it into herself and treasuring
it up in the close clay soil, it let off into the hollows the
streams which it absorbed from the heights, providing everywhere
abundant fountains and rivers, of which there may still be observed
sacred memorials in places where fountains once existed; and this
proves the truth of what I am saying.

  Such was the natural state of the country, which was cultivated,
as we may well believe, by true husbandmen, who made husbandry their
business, and were lovers of honour, and of a noble nature, and had
a soil the best in the world, and abundance of water, and in the
heaven above an excellently attempered climate. Now the city in
those days was arranged on this wise. In the first place the Acropolis
was not as now. For the fact is that a single night of excessive
rain washed away the earth and laid bare the rock; at the same time
there were earthquakes, and then occurred the extraordinary
inundation, which was the third before the great destruction of
Deucalion. But in primitive times the hill of the Acropolis extended
to the Eridanus and Ilissus, and included the Pnyx on one side, and
the Lycabettus as a boundary on the opposite side to the Pnyx, and was
all well covered with soil, and level at the top, except in one or two
places. Outside the Acropolis and under the sides of the hill there
dwelt artisans, and such of the husbandmen as were tilling the
ground near; the warrior class dwelt by themselves around the
temples of Athene and Hephaestus at the summit, which moreover they
had enclosed with a single fence like the garden of a single house. On
the north side they had dwellings in common and had erected halls
for dining in winter, and had all the buildings which they needed
for their common life, besides temples, but there was no adorning of
them with gold and silver, for they made no use of these for any
purpose; they took a middle course between meanness and ostentation,
and built modest houses in which they and their children's children
grew old, and they handed them down to others who were like
themselves, always the same. But in summer-time they left their
gardens and gymnasia and dining halls, and then the southern side of
the hill was made use of by them for the same purpose. Where the
Acropolis now is there was a fountain, which was choked by the
earthquake, and has left only the few small streams which still
exist in the vicinity, but in those days the fountain gave an abundant
supply of water for all and of suitable temperature in summer and in
winter. This is how they dwelt, being the guardians of their own
citizens and the leaders of the Hellenes, who were their willing
followers. And they took care to preserve the same number of men and
women through all time, being so many as were required for warlike
purposes, then as now-that is to say, about twenty thousand. Such were
the ancient Athenians, and after this manner they righteously
administered their own land and the rest of Hellas; they were renowned
all over Europe and Asia for the beauty of their persons and for the
many virtues of their souls, and of all men who lived in those days
they were the most illustrious. And next, if I have not forgotten what
I heard when I was a child, I will impart to you the character and
origin of their adversaries. For friends should not keep their stories
to themselves, but have them in common.

  Yet, before proceeding further in the narrative, I ought to warn
you, that you must not be surprised if you should perhaps hear
Hellenic names given to foreigners. I will tell you the reason of
this: Solon, who was intending to use the tale for his poem,
enquired into the meaning of the names, and found that the early
Egyptians in writing them down had translated them into their own
language, and he recovered the meaning of the several names and when
copying them out again translated them into our language. My
great-grandfather, Dropides, had the original writing, which is
still in my possession, and was carefully studied by me when I was a
child. Therefore if you hear names such as are used in this country,
you must not be surprised, for I have told how they came to be
introduced. The tale, which was of great length, began as follows:-

  I have before remarked in speaking of the allotments of the gods,
that they distributed the whole earth into portions differing in
extent, and made for themselves temples and instituted sacrifices. And
Poseidon, receiving for his lot the island of Atlantis, begat children
by a mortal woman, and settled them in a part of the island, which I
will describe. Looking towards the sea, but in the centre of the whole
island, there was a plain which is said to have been the fairest of
all plains and very fertile. Near the plain again, and also in the
centre of the island at a distance of about fifty stadia, there was
a mountain not very high on any side.

  In this mountain there dwelt one of the earth born primeval men of
that country, whose name was Evenor, and he had a wife named Leucippe,
and they had an only daughter who was called Cleito. The maiden had
already reached womanhood, when her father and mother died; Poseidon
fell in love with her and had intercourse with her, and breaking the
ground, inclosed the hill in which she dwelt all round, making
alternate zones of sea and land larger and smaller, encircling one
another; there were two of land and three of water, which he turned as
with a lathe, each having its circumference equidistant every way from
the centre, so that no man could get to the island, for ships and
voyages were not as yet. He himself, being a god, found no
difficulty in making special arrangements for the centre island,
bringing up two springs of water from beneath the earth, one of warm
water and the other of cold, and making every variety of food to
spring up abundantly from the soil. He also begat and brought up
five pairs of twin male children; and dividing the island of
Atlantis into ten portions, he gave to the first-born of the eldest
pair his mother's dwelling and the surrounding allotment, which was
the largest and best, and made him king over the rest; the others he
made princes, and gave them rule over many men, and a large territory.
And he named them all; the eldest, who was the first king, he named
Atlas, and after him the whole island and the ocean were called
Atlantic. To his twin brother, who was born after him, and obtained as
his lot the extremity of the island towards the Pillars of Heracles,
facing the country which is now called the region of Gades in that
part of the world, he gave the name which in the Hellenic language
is Eumelus, in the language of the country which is named after him,
Gadeirus. Of the second pair of twins he called one Ampheres, and
the other Evaemon. To the elder of the third pair of twins he gave the
name Mneseus, and Autochthon to the one who followed him. Of the
fourth pair of twins he called the elder Elasippus, and the younger
Mestor. And of the fifth pair he gave to the elder the name of
Azaes, and to the younger that of Diaprepes. All these and their
descendants for many generations were the inhabitants and rulers of
divers islands in the open sea; and also, as has been already said,
they held sway in our direction over the country within the Pillars as
far as Egypt and Tyrrhenia.

  Now Atlas had a numerous and honourable family, and they retained
the kingdom, the eldest son handing it on to his eldest for many
generations; and they had such an amount of wealth as was never before
possessed by kings and potentates, and is not likely ever to be again,
and they were furnished with everything which they needed, both in the
city and country. For because of the greatness of their empire many
things were brought to them from foreign countries, and the island
itself provided most of what was required by them for the uses of
life. In the first place, they dug out of the earth whatever was to be
found there, solid as well as fusile, and that which is now only a
name and was then something more than a name, orichalcum, was dug
out of the earth in many parts of the island, being more precious in
those days than anything except gold. There was an abundance of wood
for carpenter's work, and sufficient maintenance for tame and wild
animals. Moreover, there were a great number of elephants in the
island; for as there was provision for all other sorts of animals,
both for those which live in lakes and marshes and rivers, and also
for those which live in mountains and on plains, so there was for
the animal which is the largest and most voracious of all. Also
whatever fragrant things there now are in the earth, whether roots, or
herbage, or woods, or essences which distil from fruit and flower,
grew and thrived in that land; also the fruit which admits of
cultivation, both the dry sort, which is given us for nourishment
and any other which we use for food-we call them all by the common
name pulse, and the fruits having a hard rind, affording drinks and
meats and ointments, and good store of chestnuts and the like, which
furnish pleasure and amusement, and are fruits which spoil with
keeping, and the pleasant kinds of dessert, with which we console
ourselves after dinner, when we are tired of eating-all these that
sacred island which then beheld the light of the sun, brought forth
fair and wondrous and in infinite abundance. With such blessings the
earth freely furnished them; meanwhile they went on constructing their
temples and palaces and harbours and docks. And they arranged the
whole country in the following manner:

  First of all they bridged over the zones of sea which surrounded the
ancient metropolis, making a road to and from the royal palace. And at
the very beginning they built the palace in the habitation of the
god and of their ancestors, which they continued to ornament in
successive generations, every king surpassing the one who went
before him to the utmost of his power, until they made the building
a marvel to behold for size and for beauty. And beginning from the sea
they bored a canal of three hundred feet in width and one hundred feet
in depth and fifty stadia in length, which they carried through to the
outermost zone, making a passage from the sea up to this, which became
a harbour, and leaving an opening sufficient to enable the largest
vessels to find ingress. Moreover, they divided at the bridges the
zones of land which parted the zones of sea, leaving room for a single
trireme to pass out of one zone into another, and they covered over
the channels so as to leave a way underneath for the ships; for the
banks were raised considerably above the water. Now the largest of the
zones into which a passage was cut from the sea was three stadia in
breadth, and the zone of land which came next of equal breadth; but
the next two zones, the one of water, the other of land, were two
stadia, and the one which surrounded the central island was a
stadium only in width. The island in which the palace was situated had
a diameter of five stadia. All this including the zones and the
bridge, which was the sixth part of a stadium in width, they
surrounded by a stone wall on every side, placing towers and gates
on the bridges where the sea passed in. The stone which was used in
the work they quarried from underneath the centre island, and from
underneath the zones, on the outer as well as the inner side. One kind
was white, another black, and a third red, and as they quarried,
they at the same time hollowed out double docks, having roofs formed
out of the native rock. Some of their buildings were simple, but in
others they put together different stones, varying the colour to
please the eye, and to be a natural source of delight. The entire
circuit of the wall, which went round the outermost zone, they covered
with a coating of brass, and the circuit of the next wall they
coated with tin, and the third, which encompassed the citadel, flashed
with the red light of orichalcum.

  The palaces in the interior of the citadel were constructed on
this wise:-in the centre was a holy temple dedicated to Cleito and
Poseidon, which remained inaccessible, and was surrounded by an
enclosure of gold; this was the spot where the family of the ten
princes first saw the light, and thither the people annually brought
the fruits of the earth in their season from all the ten portions,
to be an offering to each of the ten. Here was Poseidon's own temple
which was a stadium in length, and half a stadium in width, and of a
proportionate height, having a strange barbaric appearance. All the
outside of the temple, with the exception of the pinnacles, they
covered with silver, and the pinnacles with gold. In the interior of
the temple the roof was of ivory, curiously wrought everywhere with
gold and silver and orichalcum; and all the other parts, the walls and
pillars and floor, they coated with orichalcum. In the temple they
placed statues of gold: there was the god himself standing in a
chariot-the charioteer of six winged horses-and of such a size that he
touched the roof of the building with his head; around him there
were a hundred Nereids riding on dolphins, for such was thought to
be the number of them by the men of those days. There were also in the
interior of the temple other images which had been dedicated by
private persons. And around the temple on the outside were placed
statues of gold of all the descendants of the ten kings and of their
wives, and there were many other great offerings of kings and of
private persons, coming both from the city itself and from the foreign
cities over which they held sway. There was an altar too, which in
size and workmanship corresponded to this magnificence, and the
palaces, in like manner, answered to the greatness of the kingdom
and the glory of the temple.

  In the next place, they had fountains, one of cold and another of
hot water, in gracious plenty flowing; and they were wonderfully
adapted for use by reason of the pleasantness and excellence of
their waters. They constructed buildings about them and planted
suitable trees, also they made cisterns, some open to the heavens,
others roofed over, to be used in winter as warm baths; there were the
kings' baths, and the baths of private persons, which were kept apart;
and there were separate baths for women, and for horses and cattle,
and to each of them they gave as much adornment as was suitable. Of
the water which ran off they carried some to the grove of Poseidon,
where were growing all manner of trees of wonderful height and beauty,
owing to the excellence of the soil, while the remainder was
conveyed by aqueducts along the bridges to the outer circles; and
there were many temples built and dedicated to many gods; also gardens
and places of exercise, some for men, and others for horses in both of
the two islands formed by the zones; and in the centre of the larger
of the two there was set apart a race-course of a stadium in width,
and in length allowed to extend all round the island, for horses to
race in. Also there were guardhouses at intervals for the guards,
the more trusted of whom were appointed-to keep watch in the lesser
zone, which was nearer the Acropolis while the most trusted of all had
houses given them within the citadel, near the persons of the kings.
The docks were full of triremes and naval stores, and all things
were quite ready for use. Enough of the plan of the royal palace.

  Leaving the palace and passing out across the three you came to a
wall which began at the sea and went all round: this was everywhere
distant fifty stadia from the largest zone or harbour, and enclosed
the whole, the ends meeting at the mouth of the channel which led to
the sea. The entire area was densely crowded with habitations; and the
canal and the largest of the harbours were full of vessels and
merchants coming from all parts, who, from their numbers, kept up a
multitudinous sound of human voices, and din and clatter of all
sorts night and day.

  I have described the city and the environs of the ancient palace
nearly in the words of Solon, and now I must endeavour to represent
the nature and arrangement of the rest of the land. The whole
country was said by him to be very lofty and precipitous on the side
of the sea, but the country immediately about and surrounding the city
was a level plain, itself surrounded by mountains which descended
towards the sea; it was smooth and even, and of an oblong shape,
extending in one direction three thousand stadia, but across the
centre inland it was two thousand stadia. This part of the island
looked towards the south, and was sheltered from the north. The
surrounding mountains were celebrated for their number and size and
beauty, far beyond any which still exist, having in them also many
wealthy villages of country folk, and rivers, and lakes, and meadows
supplying food enough for every animal, wild or tame, and much wood of
various sorts, abundant for each and every kind of work.

  I will now describe the plain, as it was fashioned by nature and
by the labours of many generations of kings through long ages. It
was for the most part rectangular and oblong, and where falling out of
the straight line followed the circular ditch. The depth, and width,
and length of this ditch were incredible, and gave the impression that
a work of such extent, in addition to so many others, could never have
been artificial. Nevertheless I must say what I was told. It was
excavated to the depth of a hundred, feet, and its breadth was a
stadium everywhere; it was carried round the whole of the plain, and
was ten thousand stadia in length. It received the streams which
came down from the mountains, and winding round the plain and
meeting at the city, was there let off into the sea. Further inland,
likewise, straight canals of a hundred feet in width were cut from
it through the plain, and again let off into the ditch leading to
the sea: these canals were at intervals of a hundred stadia, and by
them they brought down the wood from the mountains to the city, and
conveyed the fruits of the earth in ships, cutting transverse passages
from one canal into another, and to the city. Twice in the year they
gathered the fruits of the earth-in winter having the benefit of the
rains of heaven, and in summer the water which the land supplied by
introducing streams from the canals.

  As to the population, each of the lots in the plain had to find a
leader for the men who were fit for military service, and the size
of a lot was a square of ten stadia each way, and the total number
of all the lots was sixty thousand. And of the inhabitants of the
mountains and of the rest of the country there was also a vast
multitude, which was distributed among the lots and had leaders
assigned to them according to their districts and villages. The leader
was required to furnish for the war the sixth portion of a
war-chariot, so as to make up a total of ten thousand chariots; also
two horses and riders for them, and a pair of chariot-horses without a
seat, accompanied by a horseman who could fight on foot carrying a
small shield, and having a charioteer who stood behind the man-at-arms
to guide the two horses; also, he was bound to furnish two heavy armed
soldiers, two slingers, three stone-shooters and three javelin-men,
who were light-armed, and four sailors to make up the complement of
twelve hundred ships. Such was the military order of the royal
city-the order of the other nine governments varied, and it would be
wearisome to recount their several differences.

  As to offices and honours, the following was the arrangement from
the first. Each of the ten kings in his own division and in his own
city had the absolute control of the citizens, and, in most cases,
of the laws, punishing and slaying whomsoever he would. Now the
order of precedence among them and their mutual relations were
regulated by the commands of Poseidon which the law had handed down.
These were inscribed by the first kings on a pillar of orichalcum,
which was situated in the middle of the island, at the temple of
Poseidon, whither the kings were gathered together every fifth and
every sixth year alternately, thus giving equal honour to the odd
and to the even number. And when they were gathered together they
consulted about their common interests, and enquired if any one had
transgressed in anything and passed judgment and before they passed
judgment they gave their pledges to one another on this wise:-There
were bulls who had the range of the temple of Poseidon; and the ten
kings, being left alone in the temple, after they had offered
prayers to the god that they might capture the victim which was
acceptable to him, hunted the bulls, without weapons but with staves
and nooses; and the bull which they caught they led up to the pillar
and cut its throat over the top of it so that the blood fell upon
the sacred inscription. Now on the pillar, besides the laws, there was
inscribed an oath invoking mighty curses on the disobedient. When
therefore, after slaying the bull in the accustomed manner, they had
burnt its limbs, they filled a bowl of wine and cast in a clot of
blood for each of them; the rest of the victim they put in the fire,
after having purified the column all round. Then they drew from the
bowl in golden cups and pouring a libation on the fire, they swore
that they would judge according to the laws on the pillar, and would
punish him who in any point had already transgressed them, and that
for the future they would not, if they could help, offend against
the writing on the pillar, and would neither command others, nor
obey any ruler who commanded them, to act otherwise than according
to the laws of their father Poseidon. This was the prayer which each
of them-offered up for himself and for his descendants, at the same
time drinking and dedicating the cup out of which he drank in the
temple of the god; and after they had supped and satisfied their
needs, when darkness came on, and the fire about the sacrifice was
cool, all of them put on most beautiful azure robes, and, sitting on
the ground, at night, over the embers of the sacrifices by which
they had sworn, and extinguishing all the fire about the temple,
they received and gave judgment, if any of them had an accusation to
bring against any one; and when they given judgment, at daybreak
they wrote down their sentences on a golden tablet, and dedicated it
together with their robes to be a memorial.

  There were many special laws affecting the several kings inscribed
about the temples, but the most important was the following: They were
not to take up arms against one another, and they were all to come
to the rescue if any one in any of their cities attempted to overthrow
the royal house; like their ancestors, they were to deliberate in
common about war and other matters, giving the supremacy to the
descendants of Atlas. And the king was not to have the power of life
and death over any of his kinsmen unless he had the assent of the
majority of the ten.

  Such was the vast power which the god settled in the lost island
of Atlantis; and this he afterwards directed against our land for
the following reasons, as tradition tells: For many generations, as
long as the divine nature lasted in them, they were obedient to the
laws, and well-affectioned towards the god, whose seed they were;
for they possessed true and in every way great spirits, uniting
gentleness with wisdom in the various chances of life, and in their
intercourse with one another. They despised everything but virtue,
caring little for their present state of life, and thinking lightly of
the possession of gold and other property, which seemed only a
burden to them; neither were they intoxicated by luxury; nor did
wealth deprive them of their self-control; but they were sober, and
saw clearly that all these goods are increased by virtue and
friendship with one another, whereas by too great regard and respect
for them, they are lost and friendship with them. By such
reflections and by the continuance in them of a divine nature, the
qualities which we have described grew and increased among them; but
when the divine portion began to fade away, and became diluted too
often and too much with the mortal admixture, and the human nature got
the upper hand, they then, being unable to bear their fortune, behaved
unseemly, and to him who had an eye to see grew visibly debased, for
they were losing the fairest of their precious gifts; but to those who
had no eye to see the true happiness, they appeared glorious and
blessed at the very time when they were full of avarice and
unrighteous power. Zeus, the god of gods, who rules according to
law, and is able to see into such things, perceiving that an
honourable race was in a woeful plight, and wanting to inflict
punishment on them, that they might be chastened and improve,
collected all the gods into their most holy habitation, which, being
placed in the centre of the world, beholds all created things. And
when he had called them together, he spake as follows-*

*  The rest of the Dialogue of Critias has been lost.

                              -THE END-


                   PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE

                           SOCRATES

                            CRITO

               SCENE: The Prison of Socrates

  Socrates. WHY have you come at this hour, Crito? it must be quite
early.

  Crito. Yes, certainly.

  Soc. What is the exact time?

  Cr. The dawn is breaking.

  Soc. I wonder the keeper of the prison would let you in.

  Cr. He knows me because I often come, Socrates; moreover. I have
done him a kindness.

  Soc. And are you only just come?

  Cr. No, I came some time ago.

  Soc. Then why did you sit and say nothing, instead of awakening me
at once?

  Cr. Why, indeed, Socrates, I myself would rather not have all this
sleeplessness and sorrow. But I have been wondering at your peaceful
slumbers, and that was the reason why I did not awaken you, because
I wanted you to be out of pain. I have always thought you happy in the
calmness of your temperament; but never did I see the like of the
easy, cheerful way in which you bear this calamity.

  Soc. Why, Crito, when a man has reached my age he ought not to be
repining at the prospect of death.

  Cr. And yet other old men find themselves in similar misfortunes,
and age does not prevent them from repining.

  Soc. That may be. But you have not told me why you come at this
early hour.

  Cr. I come to bring you a message which is sad and painful; not,
as I believe, to yourself but to all of us who are your friends, and
saddest of all to me.

  Soc. What! I suppose that the ship has come from Delos, on the
arrival of which I am to die?

  Cr. No, the ship has not actually arrived, but she will probably
be here to-day, as persons who have come from Sunium tell me that they
have left her there; and therefore to-morrow, Socrates, will be the
last day of your life.

  Soc. Very well, Crito; if such is the will of God, I am willing; but
my belief is that there will be a delay of a day.

  Cr. Why do you say this?

  Soc. I will tell you. I am to die on the day after the arrival of
the ship?

  Cr. Yes; that is what the authorities say.

  Soc. But I do not think that the ship will be here until
to-morrow; this I gather from a vision which I had last night, or
rather only just now, when you fortunately allowed me to sleep.

  Cr. And what was the nature of the vision?

  Soc. There came to me the likeness of a woman, fair and comely,
clothed in white raiment, who called to me and said: O Socrates-

     "The third day hence, to Phthia shalt thou go."

  Cr. What a singular dream, Socrates!

  Soc. There can be no doubt about the meaning Crito, I think.

  Cr. Yes: the meaning is only too clear. But, O! my beloved Socrates,
let me entreat you once more to take my advice and escape. For if
you die I shall not only lose a friend who can never be replaced,
but there is another evil: people who do not know you and me will
believe that I might have saved you if I had been willing to give
money, but that I did not care. Now, can there be a worse disgrace
than this- that I should be thought to value money more than the
life of a friend? For the many will not be persuaded that I wanted you
to escape, and that you refused.

  Soc. But why, my dear Crito, should we care about the opinion of the
many? Good men, and they are the only persons who are worth
considering, will think of these things truly as they happened.

  Cr. But do you see. Socrates, that the opinion of the many must be
regarded, as is evident in your own case, because they can do the very
greatest evil to anyone who has lost their good opinion?

  Soc. I only wish, Crito, that they could; for then they could also
do the greatest good, and that would be well. But the truth is, that
they can do neither good nor evil: they cannot make a man wise or make
him foolish; and whatever they do is the result of chance.

  Cr. Well, I will not dispute about that; but please to tell me,
Socrates, whether you are not acting out of regard to me and your
other friends: are you not afraid that if you escape hence we may
get into trouble with the informers for having stolen you away, and
lose either the whole or a great part of our property; or that even
a worse evil may happen to us? Now, if this is your fear, be at
ease; for in order to save you, we ought surely to run this or even
a greater risk; be persuaded, then, and do as I say.

  Soc. Yes, Crito, that is one fear which you mention, but by no means
the only one.

  Cr. Fear not. There are persons who at no great cost are willing
to save you and bring you out of prison; and as for the informers, you
may observe that they are far from being exorbitant in their
demands; a little money will satisfy them. My means, which, as I am
sure, are ample, are at your service, and if you have a scruple
about spending all mine, here are strangers who will give you the
use of theirs; and one of them, Simmias the Theban, has brought a
sum of money for this very purpose; and Cebes and many others are
willing to spend their money too. I say, therefore, do not on that
account hesitate about making your escape, and do not say, as you
did in the court, that you will have a difficulty in knowing what to
do with yourself if you escape. For men will love you in other
places to which you may go, and not in Athens only; there are
friends of mine in Thessaly, if you like to go to them, who will value
and protect you, and no Thessalian will give you any trouble. Nor
can I think that you are justified, Socrates, in betraying your own
life when you might be saved; this is playing into the hands of your
enemies and destroyers; and moreover I should say that you were
betraying your children; for you might bring them up and educate them;
instead of which you go away and leave them, and they will have to
take their chance; and if they do not meet with the usual fate of
orphans, there will be small thanks to you. No man should bring
children into the world who is unwilling to persevere to the end in
their nurture and education. But you are choosing the easier part,
as I think, not the better and manlier, which would rather have become
one who professes virtue in all his actions, like yourself. And,
indeed, I am ashamed not only of you, but of us who are your
friends, when I reflect that this entire business of yours will be
attributed to our want of courage. The trial need never have come
on, or might have been brought to another issue; and the end of all,
which is the crowning absurdity, will seem to have been permitted by
us, through cowardice and baseness, who might have saved you, as you
might have saved yourself, if we had been good for anything (for there
was no difficulty in escaping); and we did not see how disgraceful,
Socrates, and also miserable all this will be to us as well as to you.
Make your mind up then, or rather have your mind already made up,
for the time of deliberation is over, and there is only one thing to
be done, which must be done, if at all, this very night, and which any
delay will render all but impossible; I beseech you therefore,
Socrates, to be persuaded by me, and to do as I say.

  Soc. Dear Crito, your zeal is invaluable, if a right one; but if
wrong, the greater the zeal the greater the evil; and therefore we
ought to consider whether these things shall be done or not. For I
am and always have been one of those natures who must be guided by
reason, whatever the reason may be which upon reflection appears to me
to be the best; and now that this fortune has come upon me, I cannot
put away the reasons which I have before given: the principles which I
have hitherto honored and revered I still honor, and unless we can
find other and better principles on the instant, I am certain not to
agree with you; no, not even if the power of the multitude could
inflict many more imprisonments, confiscations, deaths, frightening us
like children with hobgoblin terrors. But what will be the fairest way
of considering the question? Shall I return to your old argument about
the opinions of men, some of which are to be regarded, and others,
as we were saying, are not to be regarded? Now were we right in
maintaining this before I was condemned? And has the argument which
was once good now proved to be talk for the sake of talking; in fact
an amusement only, and altogether vanity? That is what I want to
consider with your help, Crito: whether, under my present
circumstances, the argument appears to be in any way different or not;
and is to be allowed by me or disallowed. That argument, which, as I
believe, is maintained by many who assume to be authorities, was to
the effect, as I was saying, that the opinions of some men are to be
regarded, and of other men not to be regarded. Now you, Crito, are a
disinterested person who are not going to die to-morrow- at least,
there is no human probability of this, and you are therefore not
liable to be deceived by the circumstances in which you are placed.
Tell me, then, whether I am right in saying that some opinions, and
the opinions of some men only, are to be valued, and other opinions,
and the opinions of other men, are not to be valued. I ask you whether
I was right in maintaining this?

  Cr. Certainly.

  Soc. The good are to be regarded, and not the bad?

  Cr. Yes.

  Soc. And the opinions of the wise are good, and the opinions of
the unwise are evil?

  Cr. Certainly.

  Soc. And what was said about another matter? Was the disciple in
gymnastics supposed to attend to the praise and blame and opinion of
every man, or of one man only- his physician or trainer, whoever
that was?

  Cr. Of one man only.

  Soc. And he ought to fear the censure and welcome the praise of that
one only, and not of the many?

  Cr. That is clear.

  Soc. And he ought to live and train, and eat and drink in the way
which seems good to his single master who has understanding, rather
than according to the opinion of all other men put together?

  Cr. True.

  Soc. And if he disobeys and disregards the opinion and approval of
the one, and regards the opinion of the many who have no
understanding, will he not suffer evil?

  Cr. Certainly he will.

  Soc. And what will the evil be, whither tending and what affcting,
in the disobedient person?

  Cr. Clearly, affecting the body; that is what is destroyed by the
evil.

  Soc. Very good; and is not this true, Crito, of other things which
we need not separately enumerate? In the matter of just and unjust,
fair and foul, good and evil, which are the subjects of our present
consultation, ought we to follow the opinion of the many and to fear
them; or the opinion of the one man who has understanding, and whom we
ought to fear and reverence more than all the rest of the world: and
whom deserting we shall destroy and injure that principle in us
which may be assumed to be improved by justice and deteriorated by
injustice; is there not such a principle?

  Cr. Certainly there is, Socrates.

  Soc. Take a parallel instance; if, acting under the advice of men
who have no understanding, we destroy that which is improvable by
health and deteriorated by disease- when that has been destroyed, I
say, would life be worth having? And that is- the body?

  Cr. Yes.

  Soc. Could we live, having an evil and corrupted body?

  Cr. Certainly not.

  Soc. And will life be worth having, if that higher part of man be
depraved, which is improved by justice and deteriorated by
injustice? Do we suppose that principle, whatever it may be in man,
which has to do with justice and injustice, to be inferior to the
body?

  Cr. Certainly not.

  Soc. More honored, then?

  Cr. Far more honored.

  Soc. Then, my friend, we must not regard what the many say of us:
but what he, the one man who has understanding of just and unjust,
will say, and what the truth will say. And therefore you begin in
error when you suggest that we should regard the opinion of the many
about just and unjust, good and evil, honorable and dishonorable.
Well, someone will say, "But the many can kill us."

  Cr. Yes, Socrates; that will clearly be the answer.

  Soc. That is true; but still I find with surprise that the old
argument is, as I conceive, unshaken as ever. And I should like to
know Whether I may say the same of another proposition- that not life,
but a good life, is to be chiefly valued?

  Cr. Yes, that also remains.

  Soc. And a good life is equivalent to a just and honorable one- that
holds also?

  Cr. Yes, that holds.

  Soc. From these premises I proceed to argue the question whether I
ought or ought not to try to escape without the consent of the
Athenians: and if I am clearly right in escaping, then I will make the
attempt; but if not, I will abstain. The other considerations which
you mention, of money and loss of character, and the duty of educating
children, are, I fear, only the doctrines of the multitude, who
would be as ready to call people to life, if they were able, as they
are to put them to death- and with as little reason. But now, since
the argument has thus far prevailed, the only question which remains
to be considered is, whether we shall do rightly either in escaping or
in suffering others to aid in our escape and paying them in money
and thanks, or whether we shan not do rightly; and if the latter, then
death or any other calamity which may ensue on my remaining here
must not be allowed to enter into the calculation.

  Cr. I think that you are right, Socrates; how then shall we proceed?

  Soc. Let us consider the matter together, and do you either refute
me if you can, and I will be convinced; or else cease, my dear friend,
from repeating to me that I ought to escape against the wishes of
the Athenians: for I am extremely desirous to be persuaded by you, but
not against my own better judgment. And now please to consider my
first position, and do your best to answer me.

  Cr. I will do my best.

  Soc. Are we to say that we are never intentionally to do wrong, or
that in one way we ought and in another way we ought not to do
wrong, or is doing wrong always evil and dishonorable, as I was just
now saying, and as has been already acknowledged by us? Are all our
former admissions which were made within a few days to be thrown away?
And have we, at our age, been earnestly discoursing with one another
all our life long only to discover that we are no better than
children? Or are we to rest assured, in spite of the opinion of the
many, and in spite of consequences whether better or worse, of the
truth of what was then said, that injustice is always an evil and
dishonor to him who acts unjustly? Shall we affirm that?

  Cr. Yes.

  Soc. Then we must do no wrong?

  Cr. Certainly not.

  Soc. Nor when injured injure in return, as the many imagine; for
we must injure no one at all?

  Cr. Clearly not.

  Soc. Again, Crito, may we do evil?

  Cr. Surely not, Socrates.

  Soc. And what of doing evil in return for evil, which is the
morality of the many-is that just or not?

  Cr. Not just.

  Soc. For doing evil to another is the same as injuring him?

  Cr. Very true.

  Soc. Then we ought not to retaliate or render evil for evil to
anyone, whatever evil we may have suffered from him. But I would
have you consider, Crito, whether you really mean what you are saying.
For this opinion has never been held, and never will be held, by any
considerable number of persons; and those who are agreed and those who
are not agreed upon this point have no common ground, and can only
despise one another, when they see how widely they differ. Tell me,
then, whether you agree with and assent to my first principle, that
neither injury nor retaliation nor warding off evil by evil is ever
right. And shall that be the premise of our agreement? Or do you
decline and dissent from this? For this has been of old and is still
my opinion; but, if you are of another opinion, let me hear what you
have to say. If, however, you remain of the same mind as formerly, I
will proceed to the next step.

  Cr. You may proceed, for I have not changed my mind.

  Soc. Then I will proceed to the next step, which may be put in the
form of a question: Ought a man to do what he admits to be right, or
ought he to betray the right?

  Cr. He ought to do what he thinks right.

  Soc. But if this is true, what is the application? In leaving the
prison against the will of the Athenians, do I wrong any? or rather do
I not wrong those whom I ought least to wrong? Do I not desert the
principles which were acknowledged by us to be just? What do you say?

  Cr. I cannot tell, Socrates, for I do not know.

  Soc. Then consider the matter in this way: Imagine that I am about
to play truant (you may call the proceeding by any name which you
like), and the laws and the government come and interrogate me:
"Tell us, Socrates," they say; "what are you about? are you going by
an act of yours to overturn us- the laws and the whole State, as far
as in you lies? Do you imagine that a State can subsist and not be
overthrown, in which the decisions of law have no power, but are set
aside and overthrown by individuals?" What will be our answer,
Crito, to these and the like words? Anyone, and especially a clever
rhetorician, will have a good deal to urge about the evil of setting
aside the law which requires a sentence to be carried out; and we
might reply, "Yes; but the State has injured us and given an unjust
sentence." Suppose I say that?

  Cr. Very good, Socrates.

  Soc. "And was that our agreement with you?" the law would sar, "or
were you to abide by the sentence of the State?" And if I were to
express astonishment at their saying this, the law would probably add:
"Answer, Socrates, instead of opening your eyes: you are in the
habit of asking and answering questions. Tell us what complaint you
have to make against us which justifies you in attempting to destroy
us and the State? In the first place did we not bring you into
existence? Your father married your mother by our aid and begat you.
Say whether you have any objection to urge against those of us who
regulate marriage?" None, I should reply. "Or against those of us
who regulate the system of nurture and education of children in
which you were trained? Were not the laws, who have the charge of
this, right in commanding your father to train you in music and
gymnastic?" Right, I should reply. "Well, then, since you were brought
into the world and nurtured and educated by us, can you deny in the
first place that you are our child and slave, as your fathers were
before you? And if this is true you are not on equal terms with us;
nor can you think that you have a right to do to us what we are
doing to you. Would you have any right to strike or revile or do any
other evil to a father or to your master, if you had one, when you
have been struck or reviled by him, or received some other evil at his
hands?- you would not say this? And because we think right to
destroy you, do you think that you have any right to destroy us in
return, and your country as far as in you lies? And will you, O
professor of true virtue, say that you are justified in this? Has a
philosopher like you failed to discover that our country is more to be
valued and higher and holier far than mother or father or any
ancestor, and more to be regarded in the eyes of the gods and of men
of understanding? also to be soothed, and gently and reverently
entreated when angry, even more than a father, and if not persuaded,
obeyed? And when we are punished by her, whether with imprisonment
or stripes, the punishment is to be endured in silence; and if she
leads us to wounds or death in battle, thither we follow as is
right; neither may anyone yield or retreat or leave his rank, but
whether in battle or in a court of law, or in any other place, he must
do what his city and his country order him; or he must change their
view of what is just: and if he may do no violence to his father or
mother, much less may he do violence to his country." What answer
shall we make to this, Crito? Do the laws speak truly, or do they not?

  Cr. I think that they do.

  Soc. Then the laws will say: "Consider, Socrates, if this is true,
that in your present attempt you are going to do us wrong. For,
after having brought you into the world, and nurtured and educated
you, and given you and every other citizen a share in every good
that we had to give, we further proclaim and give the right to every
Athenian, that if he does not like us when he has come of age and
has seen the ways of the city, and made our acquaintance, he may go
where he pleases and take his goods with him; and none of us laws will
forbid him or interfere with him. Any of you who does not like us
and the city, and who wants to go to a colony or to any other city,
may go where he likes, and take his goods with him. But he who has
experience of the manner in which we order justice and administer
the State, and still remains, has entered into an implied contract
that he will do as we command him. And he who disobeys us is, as we
maintain, thrice wrong: first, because in disobeying us he is
disobeying his parents; secondly, because we are the authors of his
education; thirdly, because he has made an agreement with us that he
will duly obey our commands; and he neither obeys them nor convinces
us that our commands are wrong; and we do not rudely impose them,
but give him the alternative of obeying or convincing us; that is what
we offer and he does neither. These are the sort of accusations to
which, as we were saying, you, Socrates, will be exposed if you
accomplish your intentions; you, above all other Athenians." Suppose I
ask, why is this? they will justly retort upon me that I above all
other men have acknowledged the agreement. "There is clear proof,"
they will say, "Socrates, that we and the city were not displeasing to
you. Of all Athenians you have been the most constant resident in
the city, which, as you never leave, you may be supposed to love.
For you never went out of the city either to see the games, except
once when you went to the Isthmus, or to any other place unless when
you were on military service; nor did you travel as other men do.
Nor had you any curiosity to know other States or their laws: your
affections did not go beyond us and our State; we were your especial
favorites, and you acquiesced in our government of you; and this is
the State in which you begat your children, which is a proof of your
satisfaction. Moreover, you might, if you had liked, have fixed the
penalty at banishment in the course of the trial-the State which
refuses to let you go now would have let you go then. But you
pretended that you preferred death to exile, and that you were not
grieved at death. And now you have forgotten these fine sentiments,
and pay no respect to us, the laws, of whom you are the destroyer; and
are doing what only a miserable slave would do, running away and
turning your back upon the compacts and agreements which you made as a
citizen. And first of all answer this very question: Are we right in
saying that you agreed to be governed according to us in deed, and not
in word only? Is that true or not?" How shall we answer that, Crito?
Must we not agree?

  Cr. There is no help, Socrates.

  Soc. Then will they not say: "You, Socrates, are breaking the
covenants and agreements which you made with us at your leisure, not
in any haste or under any compulsion or deception, but having had
seventy years to think of them, during which time you were at
liberty to leave the city, if we were not to your mind, or if our
covenants appeared to you to be unfair. You had your choice, and might
have gone either to Lacedaemon or Crete, which you often praise for
their good government, or to some other Hellenic or foreign State.
Whereas you, above all other Athenians, seemed to be so fond of the
State, or, in other words, of us her laws (for who would like a
State that has no laws?), that you never stirred out of her: the halt,
the blind, the maimed, were not more stationary in her than you
were. And now you run away and forsake your agreements. Not so,
Socrates, if you will take our advice; do not make yourself ridiculous
by escaping out of the city.

  "For just consider, if you transgress and err in this sort of way,
what good will you do, either to yourself or to your friends? That
your friends will be driven into exile and deprived of citizenship, or
will lose their property, is tolerably certain; and you yourself, if
you fly to one of the neighboring cities, as, for example, Thebes or
Megara, both of which are well-governed cities, will come to them as
an enemy, Socrates, and their government will be against you, and
all patriotic citizens will cast an evil eye upon you as a subverter
of the laws, and you will confirm in the minds of the judges the
justice of their own condemnation of you. For he who is a corrupter of
the laws is more than likely to be corrupter of the young and
foolish portion of mankind. Will you then flee from well-ordered
cities and virtuous men? and is existence worth having on these terms?
Or will you go to them without shame, and talk to them, Socrates?
And what will you say to them? What you say here about virtue and
justice and institutions and laws being the best things among men?
Would that be decent of you? Surely not. But if you go away from
well-governed States to Crito's friends in Thessaly, where there is
great disorder and license, they will be charmed to have the tale of
your escape from prison, set off with ludicrous particulars of the
manner in which you were wrapped in a goatskin or some other disguise,
and metamorphosed as the fashion of runaways is- that is very
likely; but will there be no one to remind you that in your old age
you violated the most sacred laws from a miserable desire of a
little more life? Perhaps not, if you keep them in a good temper;
but if they are out of temper you will hear many degrading things; you
will live, but how?- as the flatterer of all men, and the servant of
all men; and doing what?- eating and drinking in Thessaly, having gone
abroad in order that you may get a dinner. And where will be your fine
sentiments about justice and virtue then? Say that you wish to live
for the sake of your children, that you may bring them up and
educate them- will you take them into Thessaly and deprive them of
Athenian citizenship? Is that the benefit which you would confer
upon them? Or are you under the impression that they will be better
cared for and educated here if you are still alive, although absent
from them; for that your friends will take care of them? Do you
fancy that if you are an inhabitant of Thessaly they will take care of
them, and if you are an inhabitant of the other world they will not
take care of them? Nay; but if they who call themselves friends are
truly friends, they surely will.

  "Listen, then, Socrates, to us who have brought you up. Think not of
life and children first, and of justice afterwards, but of justice
first, that you may be justified before the princes of the world
below. For neither will you nor any that belong to you be happier or
holier or juster in this life, or happier in another, if you do as
Crito bids. Now you depart in innocence, a sufferer and not a doer of
evil; a victim, not of the laws, but of men. But if you go forth,
returning evil for evil, and injury for injury, breaking the covenants
and agreements which you have made with us, and wronging those whom
you ought least to wrong, that is to say, yourself, your friends, your
country, and us, we shall be angry with you while you live, and our
brethren, the laws in the world below, will receive you as an enemy;
for they will know that you have done your best to destroy us. Listen,
then, to us and not to Crito."

  This is the voice which I seem to hear murmuring in my ears, like
the sound of the flute in the ears of the mystic; that voice, I say,
is humming in my ears, and prevents me from hearing any other. And I
know that anything more which you will say will be in vain. Yet speak,
if you have anything to say.

  Cr. I have nothing to say, Socrates.

  Soc. Then let me follow the intimations of the will of God.

                             -THE END-



  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: SOCRATES, who is the narrator; CRITO;
CLEINIAS; EUTHYDEMUS; DIONYSODORUS; CTESIPPUS. Scene: The Lyceum

  Crito. Who was the person, Socrates, with whom you were talking
yesterday at the Lyceum? There was such a crowd around you that I
could not get within hearing, but I caught a sight of him over their
heads, and I made out, as I thought, that he was a stranger with
whom you were talking: who was he?

  Socrates. There were two, Crito; which of them do you mean?

  Cri. The one whom I mean was seated second from you on the
right-hand side. In the middle was Cleinias the young son of Axiochus,
who has wonderfully grown; he is only about the age of my own
Critobulus, but he is much forwarder and very good-looking: the
other is thin and looks younger than he is.

  Soc. He whom you mean, Crito, is Euthydemus; and on my left hand
there was his brother Dionysodorus, who also took part in the
conversation.

  Cri. Neither of them are known to me, Socrates; they are a new
importation of Sophists, as I should imagine. Of what country are
they, and what is their line of wisdom?

  Soc. As to their origin, I believe that they are natives of this
part of the world, and have migrated from Chios to Thurii; they were
driven out of Thurii, and have been living for many years past in
these regions. As to their wisdom, about which you ask, Crito, they
are wonderful-consummate! I never knew what the true pancratiast was
before; they are simply made up of fighting, not like the two
Acarnanian brothers who fight with their bodies only, but this pair of
heroes, besides being perfect in the use of their bodies, are
invincible in every sort of warfare; for they are capital at
fighting in armour, and will teach the art to any one who pays them;
and also they are most skilful in legal warfare; they will plead
themselves and teach others to speak and to compose speeches which
will have an effect upon the courts. And this was only the beginning
of their wisdom, but they have at last carried out the pancratiastic
art to the very end, and have mastered the only mode of fighting which
had been hitherto neglected by them; and now no one dares even to
stand up against them: such is their skill in the war of words, that
they can refute any proposition whether true or false. Now I am
thinking, Crito, of placing myself in their hands; for they say that
in a short time they can impart their skill to any one.

  Cri. But, Socrates, are you not too old? there may be reason to fear
that.

  Soc. Certainly not, Crito; as I will prove to you, for I have the
consolation of knowing that they began this art of disputation which I
covet, quite, as I may say, in old age; last year, or the year before,
they had none of their new wisdom. I am only apprehensive that I may
bring the two strangers into disrepute, as I have done Connus the
son of Metrobius, the harp-player, who is still my music-master; for
when the boys who go to him see me going with them, they laugh at me
and call him grandpapa's master. Now I should not like the strangers
to experience similar treatment; the fear of ridicule may make them
unwilling to receive me; and therefore, Crito, I shall try and
persuade some old men to accompany me to them, as I persuaded them
to go with me to Connus, and I hope that you will make one: and
perhaps we had better take your sons as a bait; they will want to have
them as pupils, and for the sake of them willing to receive us.

  Cri. I see no objection, Socrates, if you like; but first I wish
that you would give me a description of their wisdom, that I may
know beforehand what we are going to learn.

  Soc. In less than no time you shall hear; for I cannot say that I
did not attend-I paid great attention to them, and I remember and will
endeavour to repeat the whole story. Providentially I was sitting
alone in the dressing-room of the Lyceum where you saw me, and was
about to depart; when I was getting up I recognized the familiar
divine sign: so I sat down again, and in a little while the two
brothers Euthydemus and Dionysodorus came in, and several others
with them, whom I believe to be their disciples, and they walked about
in the covered court; they had not taken more than two or three
turns when Cleinias entered, who, as you truly say, is very much
improved: he was followed by a host of lovers, one of whom was
Ctesippus the Paeanian, a well-bred youth, but also having the
wildness of youth. Cleinias saw me from the entrance as I was
sitting alone, and at once came and sat down on the right hand of
me, as you describe; and Dionysodorus and Euthydemus, when they saw
him, at first stopped and talked with one another, now and then
glancing at us, for I particularly watched them; and then Euthydemus
came and sat down by the youth, and the other by me on the left
hand; the rest anywhere. I saluted the brothers, whom I had not seen
for a long time; and then I said to Cleinias: Here are two wise men,
Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, Cleinias, wise not in a small but in a
large way of wisdom, for they know all about war,-all that a good
general ought to know about the array and command of an army, and
the whole art of fighting in armour: and they know about law too,
and can teach a man how to use the weapons of the courts when he is
injured.

  They heard me say this, but only despised me. I observed that they
looked at one another, and both of them laughed; and then Euthydemus
Those, Socrates, are matters which we no longer pursue seriously; to
us they are secondary occupations.

  Indeed, I said, if such occupations are regarded by you as
secondary, what must the principal one be; tell me, I beseech you,
what that noble study is?

  The teaching of virtue, Socrates, he replied, is our principal
occupation; and we believe that we can impart it better and quicker
than any man.

  My God! I said, and where did you learn that? I always thought, as I
was saying just now, that your chief accomplishment was the art of
fighting in armour; and I used to say as much of you, for I remember
that you professed this when you were here before. But now if you
really have the other knowledge, O forgive me: I address you as I
would superior beings, and ask you to pardon the impiety of my
former expressions. But are you quite sure about this, Dionysodorus
and Euthydemus? the promise is so vast, that a feeling of
incredulity steals over me.

  You may take our word, Socrates, for the fact.

  Then I think you happier in having such a treasure than the great
king is in the possession of his kingdom. And please to tell me
whether you intend to exhibit your wisdom; or what will you do?

  That is why we have come hither, Socrates; and our purpose is not
only to exhibit, but also to teach any one who likes to learn.

  But I can promise you, I said, that every unvirtuous person will
want to learn. I shall be the first; and there is the youth
Cleinias, and Ctesippus: and here are several others, I said, pointing
to the lovers of Cleinias, who were beginning to gather round us.
Now Ctesippus was sitting at some distance from Cleinias; and when
Euthydemus leaned forward in talking with me, he was prevented from
seeing Cleinias, who was between us; and so, partly because he
wanted to look at his love, and also because he was interested, he
jumped up and stood opposite to us: and all the other admirers of
Cleinias, as well as the disciples of Euthydemus and Dionysodorus,
followed his example. And these were the persons whom I showed to
Euthydemus, telling him that they were all eager to learn: to which
Ctesippus and all of them with one voice vehemently assented, and
bid him exhibit the power of his wisdom. Then I said: O Euthydemus and
Dionysodorus, I earnestly request you to do myself and the company the
favour to exhibit. There may be some trouble in giving the whole
exhibition; but tell me one thing,-can you make a good man of him only
who is already convinced that he ought to learn of you, or of him also
who is not convinced, either because he imagines that virtue is a
thing which cannot be taught at all, or that you are not the
teachers of it? Has your art power to persuade him, who is of the
latter temper of mind, that virtue can be taught; and that you are the
men from whom he will best learn it?

  Certainly, Socrates, said Dionysodorus; our art will do both.

  And you and your brother, Dionysodorus, I said, of all men who are
now living are the most likely to stimulate him to philosophy and to
the study of virtue?

  Yes, Socrates, I rather think that we are.

  Then I wish that you would be so good as to defer the other part
of the exhibition, and only try to persuade the youth whom you see
here that he ought to be a philosopher and study virtue. Exhibit that,
and you will confer a great favour on me and on every one present; for
the fact is I and all of us are extremely anxious that he should
become truly good. His name is Cleinias, and he is the son of
Axiochus, and grandson of the old Alcibiades, cousin of the Alcibiades
that now is. He is quite young, and we are naturally afraid that
some one may get the start of us, and turn his mind in a wrong
direction, and he may be ruined. Your visit, therefore, is most
happily timed; and I hope that you will make a trial of the young man,
and converse with him in our presence, if you have no objection.

  These were pretty nearly the expressions which I used; and
Euthydemus, in a manly and at the same time encouraging tone, replied:
There can be no objection, Socrates, if the young man is only
willing to answer questions.

  He is quite accustomed to do so, I replied; for his friends often
come and ask him questions and argue with him; and therefore he is
quite at home in answering.

  What followed, Crito, how can I rightly narrate? For not slight is
the task of rehearsing infinite wisdom, and therefore, like the poets,
I ought to commence my relation with an invocation to Memory and the
Muses. Now Euthydemus, if I remember rightly, began nearly as follows:
O Cleinias, are those who learn the wise or the ignorant?

  The youth, overpowered by the question blushed, and in his
perplexity looked at me for help; and I, knowing that he was
disconcerted, said: Take courage, Cleinias, and answer like a man
whichever you think; for my belief is that you will derive the
greatest benefit from their questions.

  Whichever he answers, said Dionysodorus, leaning forward so as to
catch my ear, his face beaming with laughter, I prophesy that he
will be refuted, Socrates.

  While he was speaking to me, Cleinias gave his answer: and therefore
I had no time to warn him of the predicament in which he was placed,
and he answered that those who learned were the wise.

  Euthydemus proceeded: There are some whom you would call teachers,
are there not?

  The boy assented.

  And they are the teachers of those who learn-the grammar-master
and the lyre master used to teach you and other boys; and you were the
learners?

  Yes.

  And when you were learners you did not as yet know the things
which you were learning?

  No, he said.

  And were you wise then?

  No, indeed, he said.

  But if you were not wise you were unlearned?

  Certainly.

  You then, learning what you did not know, were unlearned when you
were learning?

  The youth nodded assent.

  Then the unlearned learn, and not the wise, Cleinias, as you
imagine.

  At these words the followers of Euthydemus, of whom I spoke, like
a chorus at the bidding of their director, laughed and cheered.
Then, before the youth had time to recover his breath, Dionysodorus
cleverly took him in hand, and said: Yes, Cleinias; and when the
grammar master dictated anything to you, were they the wise boys or
the unlearned who learned the dictation?

  The wise, replied Cleinias.

  Then after all the wise are the learners and not the unlearned;
and your last answer to Euthydemus was wrong.

  Then once more the admirers of the two heroes, in an ecstasy at
their wisdom, gave vent to another peal of laughter, while the rest of
us were silent and amazed. Euthydemus, observing this, determined to
persevere with the youth; and in order to heighten the effect went
on asking another similar question, which might be compared to the
double turn of an expert dancer. Do those, said he, who learn, learn
what they know, or what they do not know?

  Again Dionysodorus whispered to me: That, Socrates, is just
another of the same sort.

  Good heavens, I said; and your last question was so good!

  Like all our other questions, Socrates, he replied-inevitable.

  I see the reason, I said, why you are in such reputation among
your disciples.

  Meanwhile Cleinias had answered Euthydemus that those who learned
learn what they do not know; and he put him through a series of
questions the same as before.

  Do you not know letters?

  He assented.

  All letters?

  Yes.

  But when the teacher dictates to you, does he not dictate letters?

  To this also he assented.

  Then if you know all letters, he dictates that which you know?

  This again was admitted by him.

  Then, said the other, you do not learn that which he dictates; but
he only who does not know letters learns?

  Nay, said Cleinias; but I do learn.

  Then, said he, you learn what you know, if you know all the letters?

  He admitted that.

  Then, he said, you were wrong in your answer.

  The word was hardly out of his mouth when Dionysodorus took up the
argument, like a ball which he caught, and had another throw at the
youth. Cleinias, he said, Euthydemus is deceiving you. For tell me
now, is not learning acquiring knowledge of that which one learns?

  Cleinias assented.

  And knowing is having knowledge at the time?

  He agreed.

  And not knowing is not having knowledge at the time?

  He admitted that.

  And are those who acquire those who have or have not a thing?

  Those who have not.

  And have you not admitted that those who do not know are of the
number of those who have not?

  He nodded assent.

  Then those who learn are of the class of those who acquire, and
not of those who have?

  He agreed.

  Then, Cleinias, he said, those who do not know learn, and not
those who know.

  Euthydemus was proceeding to give the youth a third fall; but I knew
that he was in deep water, and therefore, as I wanted to give him a
respite lest he should be disheartened, I said to him consolingly: You
must not be surprised, Cleinias, at the singularity of their mode of
speech: this I say because you may not understand what the two
strangers are doing with you; they are only initiating you after the
manner of the Corybantes in the mysteries; and this answers to the
enthronement, which, if you have ever been initiated, is, as you
will know, accompanied by dancing and sport; and now they are just
prancing and dancing about you, and will next proceed to initiate you;
imagine then that you have gone through the first part of the
sophistical ritual, which, as Prodicus says, begins with initiation
into the correct use of terms. The two foreign gentlemen, perceiving
that you did not know, wanted to explain to you that the word "to
learn" has two meanings, and is used, first, in the sense of acquiring
knowledge of some matter of which you previously have no knowledge,
and also, when you have the knowledge, in the sense of reviewing
this matter, whether something done or spoken by the light of this
newly-acquired knowledge; the latter is generally called "knowing"
rather than "learning," but the word "learning" is also used; and
you did not see, as they explained to you, that the term is employed
of two opposite sorts of men, of those who know, and of those who do
not know. There was a similar trick in the second question, when
they asked you whether men learn what they know or what they do not
know. These parts of learning are not serious, and therefore I say
that the gentlemen are not serious, but are only playing with you. For
if a man had all that sort of knowledge that ever was, he would not be
at all the wiser; he would only be able to play with men, tripping
them up and over setting them with distinctions of words. He would
be like a person who pulls away a stool from some one when he is about
to sit down, and then laughs and makes merry at the sight of his
friend overturned and laid on his back. And you must regard all that
has hitherto passed between you and them as merely play. But in what
is to follow I am certain that they will exhibit to you their
serious purpose, and keep their promise (I will show them how); for
they promised to give me a sample of the hortatory philosophy, but I
suppose that they wanted to have a game with you first. And now,
Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, I think that we have had enough of
this. Will you let me see you explaining to the young man how he is to
apply himself to the study of virtue and wisdom? And I will first show
you what I conceive to be the nature of the task, and what sort of a
discourse I desire to hear; and if I do this in a very inartistic
and ridiculous manner, do not laugh at me, for I only venture to
improvise before you because I am eager to hear your wisdom: and I
must therefore ask you and your disciples to refrain from laughing.
And now, O son of Axiochus, let me put a question to you: Do not all
men desire happiness? And yet, perhaps, this is one of those
ridiculous questions which I am afraid to ask, and which ought not
to be asked by a sensible man: for what human being is there who
does not desire happiness?

  There is no one, said Cleinias, who does not.

  Well, then, I said, since we all of us desire happiness, how can
we be happy?-that is the next question. Shall we not be happy if we
have many good things? And this, perhaps, is even a more simple
question than the first, for there can be no doubt of the answer.

  He assented.

  And what things do we esteem good? No solemn sage is required to
tell us this, which may be easily answered; for every one will say
that wealth is a good.

  Certainly, he said.

  And are not health and beauty goods, and other personal gifts?

  He agreed.

  Can there be any doubt that good birth, and power, and honours in
one's own land, are goods?

  He assented.

  And what other goods are there? I said. What do you say of
temperance, justice, courage: do you not verily and indeed think,
Cleinias, that we shall be more right in ranking them as goods than in
not ranking them as goods? For a dispute might possibly arise about
this. What then do you say?

  They are goods, said Cleinias.

  Very well, I said; and where in the company shall we find a place
for wisdom-among the goods or not?

  Among the goods.

  And now, I said, think whether we have left out any considerable
goods.

  I do not think that we have, said Cleinias.

  Upon recollection, I said, indeed I am afraid that we have left
out the greatest of them all.

  What is that? he asked.

  Fortune, Cleinias, I replied; which all, even the most foolish,
admit to be the greatest of goods.

  True, he said.

  On second thoughts, I added, how narrowly, O son of Axiochus, have
you and I escaped making a laughing-stock of ourselves to the
strangers.

  Why do you say so?

  Why, because we have already spoken of good-fortune, and are but
repeating ourselves.

  What do you mean?

  I mean that there is something ridiculous in again putting forward
good-fortune, which has a place in the list already, and saying the
same thing twice over.

  He asked what was the meaning of this, and I replied: Surely
wisdom is good-fortune; even a child may know that.

  The simple-minded youth was amazed; and, observing his surprise, I
said to him: Do you not know, Cleinias, that flute-players are most
fortunate and successful in performing on the flute?

  He assented.

  And are not the scribes most fortunate in writing and reading
letters?

  Certainly.

  Amid the dangers of the sea, again, are any more fortunate on the
whole than wise pilots?

  None, certainly.

  And if you were engaged in war, in whose company would you rather
take the risk-in company with a wise general, or with a foolish one?

  With a wise one.

  And if you were ill, whom would you rather have as a companion in
a dangerous illness-a wise physician, or an ignorant one?

  A wise one.

  You think, I said, that to act with a wise man is more fortunate
than to act with an ignorant one?

  He assented.

  Then wisdom always makes men fortunate: for by wisdom no man would
ever err, and therefore he must act rightly and succeed, or his wisdom
would be wisdom no longer.

  We contrived at last, somehow or other, to agree in a general
conclusion, that he who had wisdom had no need of fortune. I then
recalled to his mind the previous state of the question. You remember,
I said, our making the admission that we should be happy and fortunate
if many good things were present with us?

  He assented.

  And should we be happy by reason of the presence of good things,
if they profited us not, or if they profited us?

  If they profited us, he said.

  And would they profit us, if we only had them and did not use
them? For example, if we had a great deal of food and did not eat,
or a great deal of drink and did not drink, should we be profited?

  Certainly not, he said.

  Or would an artisan, who had all the implements necessary for his
work, and did not use them, be any the better for the possession of
them? For example, would a carpenter be any the better for having
all his tools and plenty of wood, if he never worked?

  Certainly not, he said.

  And if a person had wealth and all the goods of which we were just
now speaking, and did not use them, would he be happy because he
possessed them?

  No indeed, Socrates.

  Then, I said, a man who would be happy must not only have the good
things, but he must also use them; there is no advantage in merely
having them?

  True.

  Well, Cleinias, but if you have the use as well as the possession of
good things, is that sufficient to confer happiness?

  Yes, in my opinion.

  And may a person use them either rightly or wrongly?

  He must use them rightly.

  That is quite true, I said. And the wrong use of a thing is far
worse than the non-use; for the one is an evil, and the other is
neither a good nor an evil. You admit that?

  He assented.

  Now in the working and use of wood, is not that which gives the
right use simply the knowledge of the carpenter?

  Nothing else, he said.

  And surely, in the manufacture of vessels, knowledge is that which
gives the right way of making them?

  He agreed.

  And in the use of the goods of which we spoke at first-wealth and
health and beauty, is not knowledge that which directs us to the right
use of them, and regulates our practice about them?

  He assented.

  Then in every possession and every use of a thing, knowledge is that
which gives a man not only good-fortune but success?

  He again assented.

  And tell me, I said, O tell me, what do possessions profit a man, if
he have neither good sense nor wisdom? Would a man be better off,
having and doing many things without wisdom, or a few things with
wisdom? Look at the matter thus: If he did fewer things would he not
make fewer mistakes? if he made fewer mistakes would he not have fewer
misfortunes? and if he had fewer misfortunes would he not be less
miserable?

  Certainly, he said.

  And who would do least-a Poor man or a rich man?

  A poor man.

  A weak man or a strong man?

  A weak man.

  A noble man or a mean man?

  A mean man.

  And a coward would do less than a courageous and temperate man?

  Yes.

  And an indolent man less than an active man?

  He assented.

  And a slow man less than a quick; and one who had dull perceptions
of seeing and hearing less than one who had keen ones?

  All this was mutually allowed by us.

  Then, I said, Cleinias, the sum of the matter appears to be that the
goods of which we spoke before are not to be regarded as goods in
themselves, but the degree of good and evil in them depends on whether
they are or are not under the guidance of knowledge: under the
guidance of ignorance, they are greater evils than their opposites,
inasmuch as they are more able to minister to the evil principle which
rules them; and when under the guidance of wisdom and prudence, they
are greater goods: but in themselves are nothing?

  That, he replied, is obvious.

  What then is the result of what has been said? Is not this the
result-that other things are indifferent, and that wisdom is the
only good, and ignorance the only evil?

  He assented.

  Let us consider a further point, I said: Seeing that all men
desire happiness, and happiness, as has been shown, is gained by a
use, and a right use, of the things of life, and the right use of
them, and good fortune in the use of them, is given by
knowledge,-the inference is that everybody ought by all means to try
and make himself as wise as he can?

  Yes, he said.

  And when a man thinks that he ought to obtain this treasure, far
more than money, from a father or a guardian or a friend or a
suitor, whether citizen or stranger-the eager desire and prayer to
them that they would impart wisdom to you, is not at all
dishonourable, Cleinias; nor is any one to be blamed for doing any
honourable service or ministration to any man, whether a lover or not,
if his aim is to get wisdom. Do you agree? I said.

  Yes, he said, I quite agree, and think that you are right.

  Yes, I said, Cleinias, if only wisdom can be taught, and does not
come to man spontaneously; for this is a point which has still to be
considered, and is not yet agreed upon by you and me-

  But I think, Socrates, that wisdom can be taught, he said.

  Best of men, I said, I am delighted to hear you say so; and I am
also grateful to you for having saved me from a long and tiresome
investigation as to whether wisdom can be taught or not. But now, as
you think that wisdom can be taught, and that wisdom only can make a
man happy and fortunate will you not acknowledge that all of us
ought to love wisdom, and you individually will try to love her?

  Certainly, Socrates, he said; I will do my best.

  I was pleased at hearing this; and I turned to Dionysodorus and
Euthydemus and said: That is an example, clumsy and tedious I admit,
of the sort of exhortations which I would have you give; and I hope
that one of you will set forth what I have been saying in a more
artistic style: or at least take up the enquiry where I left off,
and proceed to show the youth whether he should have all knowledge; or
whether there is one sort of knowledge only which will make him good
and happy, and what that is. For, as I was saying at first, the
improvement of this young man in virtue and wisdom is a matter which
we have very much at heart.

  Thus I spoke, Crito, and was all attention to what was coming. I
wanted to see how they would approach the question, and where they
would start in their exhortation to the young man that he should
practise wisdom and virtue. Dionysodorus, who was the elder, spoke
first. Everybody's eyes were directed towards him, perceiving that
something wonderful might shortly be expected. And certainly they were
not far wrong; for the man, Crito, began a remarkable discourse well
worth hearing, and wonderfully persuasive regarded as an exhortation
to virtue.

  Tell me, he said, Socrates and the rest of you who say that you want
this young man to become wise, are you in jest or in real earnest?

  I was led by this to imagine that they fancied us to have been
jesting when we asked them to converse with the youth, and that this
made them jest and play, and being under this impression, I was the
more decided in saying that we were in profound earnest.
Dionysodorus said:

  Reflect, Socrates; you may have to deny your words.

  I have reflected, I said; and I shall never deny my words.

  Well, said he, and so you say that you wish Cleinias to become wise?

  Undoubtedly.

  And he is not wise as yet?

  At least his modesty will not allow him to say that he is.

  You wish him, he said, to become wise and not, to be ignorant?

  That we do.

  You wish him to be what he is not, and no longer to be what he is?

  I was thrown into consternation at this.

  Taking advantage of my consternation he added: You wish him no
longer to be what he is, which can only mean that you wish him to
perish. Pretty lovers and friends they must be who want their
favourite not to be, or to perish!

  When Ctesippus heard this he got very angry (as a lover well
might) and said: Stranger of Thurii-if politeness would allow me I
should say, A plague upon you! What can make you tell such a lie about
me and the others, which I hardly like to repeat, as that I wish
Cleinias to perish?

  Euthydemus replied: And do you think, Ctesippus, that it is possible
to tell a lie?

  Yes, said Ctesippus; I should be mad to say anything else.

  And in telling a lie, do you tell the thing of which you speak or
not?

  You tell the thing of which you speak.

  And he who tells, tells that thing which he tells, and no other?

  Yes, said Ctesippus.

  And that is a distinct thing apart from other things?

  Certainly.

  And he who says that thing says that which is?

  Yes.

  And he who says that which is, says the truth. And therefore
Dionysodorus, if he says that which is, says the truth of you and no
lie.

  Yes, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus; but in saying this, he says what is
not.

  Euthydemus answered: And that which is not is not?

  True.

  And that which is not is nowhere?

  Nowhere.

  And can any one do anything about that which has no existence, or do
to Cleinias that which is not and is nowhere?

  I think not, said Ctesippus.

  Well, but do rhetoricians, when they speak in the assembly, do
nothing?

  Nay, he said, they do something.

  And doing is making?

  Yes.

  And speaking is doing and making?

  He agreed.

  Then no one says that which is not, for in saying what is not he
would be doing something; and you have already acknowledged that no
one can do what is not. And therefore, upon your own showing, no one
says what is false; but if Dionysodorus says anything, he says what is
true and what is.

  Yes, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus; but he speaks of things in a
certain way and manner, and not as they really are.

  Why, Ctesippus, said Dionysodorus, do you mean to say that any one
speaks of things as they are?

  Yes, he said-all gentlemen and truth-speaking persons.

  And are not good things good, and evil things evil?

  He assented.

  And you say that gentlemen speak of things as they are?

  Yes.

  Then the good speak evil of evil things, if they speak of them as
they are?

  Yes, indeed, he said; and they speak evil of evil men. And if I
may give you a piece of advice, you had better take care that they
do not speak evil of you, since I can tell you that the good speak
evil of the evil.

  And do they speak great things of the great, rejoined Euthydemus,
and warm things of the warm?

  To be sure they do, said Ctesippus; and they speak coldly of the
insipid and cold dialectician.

  You are abusive, Ctesippus, said Dionysodorus, you are abusive!

  Indeed, I am not, Dionysodorus, he replied; for I love you and am
giving you friendly advice, and, if I could, would persuade you not
like a boor to say in my presence that I desire my beloved, whom I
value above all men, to perish.

  I saw that they were getting exasperated with one another, so I made
a joke with him and said: O Ctesippus, I think that we must allow
the strangers to use language in their own way, and not quarrel with
them about words, but be thankful for what they give us. If they
know how to destroy men in such a way as to make good and sensible men
out of bad and foolish ones-whether this is a discovery of their
own, or whether they have learned from some one else this new sort
of death and destruction which enables them to get rid of a bad man
and turn him into a good one-if they know this (and they do know
this-at any rate they said just now that this was the secret of
their newly-discovered art)-let them, in their phraseology, destroy
the youth and make him wise, and all of us with him. But if you
young men do not like to trust yourselves with them, then fiat
experimentum in corpore senis; I will be the Carian on whom they shall
operate. And here I offer my old person to Dionysodorus; he may put me
into the pot, like Medea the Colchian, kill me, boil me, if he will
only make me good.

  Ctesippus said: And I, Socrates, am ready to commit myself to the
strangers; they may skin me alive, if they please (and I am pretty
well skinned by them already), if only my skin is made at last, not
like that of Marsyas, into a leathern bottle, but into a piece of
virtue. And here is Dionysodorus fancying that I am angry with him,
when really I am not angry at all; I do but contradict him when I
think that he is speaking improperly to me: and you must not
confound abuse and contradiction, O illustrious Dionysodorus; for they
are quite different things.

  Contradiction! said Dionysodorus; why, there never was such a thing.

  Certainly there is, he replied; there can be no question of that. Do
you, Dionysodorus, maintain that there is not?

  You will never prove to me, he said, that you have heard any one
contradicting any one else.

  Indeed, said Ctesippus; then now you may hear me contradicting
Dionysodorus.

  Are you prepared to make that good?

  Certainly, he said.

  Well, have not all things words expressive of them?

  Yes.

  Of their existence or of their non-existence?

  Of their existence.

  Yes, Ctesippus, and we just now proved, as you may remember, that no
man could affirm a negative; for no one could affirm that which is
not.

  And what does that signify? said Ctesippus; you and I may contradict
all the same for that.

  But can we contradict one another, said Dionysodorus, when both of
us are describing the same thing? Then we must surely be speaking
the same thing?

  He assented.

  Or when neither of us is speaking of the same thing? For then
neither of us says a word about the thing at all?

  He granted that proposition also.

  But when I describe something and you describe another thing, or I
say something and you say nothing-is there any contradiction? How
can he who speaks contradict him who speaks not?

  Here Ctesippus was silent; and I in my astonishment said: What do
you mean, Dionysodorus? I have often heard, and have been amazed to
hear, this thesis of yours, which is maintained and employed by the
disciples of Protagoras, and others before them, and which to me
appears to be quite wonderful, and suicidal as well as destructive,
and I think that I am most likely to hear the truth about it from you.
The dictum is that there is no such thing as falsehood; a man must
either say what is true or say nothing. Is not that your position?

  He assented.

  But if he cannot speak falsely, may he not think falsely?

  No, he cannot, he said.

  Then there is no such thing as false opinion?

  No, he said.

  Then there is no such thing as ignorance, or men who are ignorant;
for is not ignorance, if there be such a thing, a mistake of fact?

  Certainly, he said.

  And that is impossible?

  Impossible, he replied.

  Are you saying this as a paradox, Dionysodorus; or do you
seriously maintain no man to be ignorant?

  Refute me, he said.

  But how can I refute you, if, as you say, to tell a falsehood is
impossible?

  Very true, said Euthydemus.

  Neither did I tell you just now to refute me, said Dionysodorus; for
how can I tell you to do that which is not?

  O Euthydemus, I said, I have but a dull conception of these
subtleties and excellent devices of wisdom; I am afraid that I
hardly understand them, and you must forgive me therefore if I ask a
very stupid question: if there be no falsehood or false opinion or
ignorance, there can be no such thing as erroneous action, for a man
cannot fail of acting as he is acting-that is what you mean?

  Yes, he replied.

  And now, I said, I will ask my stupid question: If there is no
such thing as error in deed, word, or thought, then what, in the
name of goodness, do you come hither to teach? And were you not just
now saying that you could teach virtue best of all men, to any one who
was willing to learn?

  And are you such an old fool, Socrates, rejoined Dionysodorus,
that you bring up now what I said at first-and if I had said
anything last year, I suppose that you would bring that up too-but are
non-plussed at the words which I have just uttered?

  Why, I said, they are not easy to answer; for they are the words
of wise men: and indeed I know not what to make of this word
"nonplussed," which you used last: what do you mean by it,
Dionysodorus? You must mean that I cannot refute your argument. Tell
me if the words have any other sense.

  No, he replied, they mean what you say. And now answer.

  What, before you, Dionysodorus? I said.

  Answer, said he.

  And is that fair?

  Yes, quite fair, he said.

  Upon what principle? I said. I can only suppose that you are a
very wise man who comes to us in the character of a great logician,
and who knows when to answer and when not to answer-and now you will
not open your mouth at all, because you know that you ought not.

  You prate, he said, instead of answering. But if, my good sir, you
admit that I am wise, answer as I tell you.

  I suppose that I must obey, for you are master. Put the question.

  Are the things which have sense alive or lifeless?

  They are alive.

  And do you know of any word which is alive?

  I cannot say that I do.

  Then why did you ask me what sense my words had?

  Why, because I was stupid and made a mistake. And yet, perhaps, I
was right after all in saying that words have a sense;-what do you
say, wise man? If I was not in error, even you will not refute me, and
all your wisdom will be non-plussed; but if I did fall into error,
then again you are wrong in saying that there is no error,-and this
remark was made by you not quite a year ago. I am inclined to think,
however, Dionysodorus and Euthydemus, that this argument lies where it
was and is not very likely to advance: even your skill in the
subtleties of logic, which is really amazing, has not found out the
way of throwing another and not falling yourself, now any more than of
old.

  Ctesippus said: Men of Chios, Thurii, or however and whatever you
call yourselves, I wonder at you, for you seem to have no objection to
talking nonsense.

  Fearing that there would be high words, I again endeavoured to
soothe Ctesippus, and said to him: To you, Ctesippus, I must repeat
what I said before to Cleinias-that you do not understand the ways
of these philosophers from abroad. They are not serious, but, like the
Egyptian wizard, Proteus, they take different forms and deceive us
by their enchantments: and let us, like Menelaus, refuse to let them
go until they show themselves to us in earnest. When they begin to
be in earnest their full beauty will appear: let us then beg and
entreat and beseech them to shine forth. And I think that I had better
once more exhibit the form in which I pray to behold them; it might be
a guide to them. I will go on therefore where I left off, as well as I
can, in the hope that I may touch their hearts and move them to
pity, and that when they see me deeply serious and interested, they
also may be serious. You, Cleinias, I said, shall remind me at what
point we left off. Did we not agree that philosophy should be studied?
and was not that our conclusion?

  Yes, he replied.

  And philosophy is the acquisition of knowledge?

  Yes, he said.

  And what knowledge ought we to acquire? May we not answer with
absolute truth-A knowledge which will do us good?

  Certainly, he said.

  And should we be any the better if we went about having a
knowledge of the places where most gold was hidden in the earth?

  Perhaps we should, he said.

  But have we not already proved, I said, that we should be none the
better off, even if without trouble and digging all the gold which
there is in the earth were ours? And if we knew how to convert
stones into gold, the knowledge would be of no value to us, unless
we also knew how to use the gold? Do you not remember? I said.

  I quite remember, he said.

  Nor would any other knowledge, whether of money-making, or of
medicine, or of any other art which knows only how to make a thing,
and not to use it when made, be of any good to us. Am I not right?

  He agreed.

  And if there were a knowledge which was able to make men immortal,
without giving them the knowledge of the way to use the immortality,
neither would there be any use in that, if we may argue from the
analogy of the previous instances?

  To all this he agreed.

  Then, my dear boy, I said, the knowledge which we want is one that
uses as well as makes?

  True, he said.

  And our desire is not to be skilful lyre-makers, or artists of
that sort-far otherwise; for with them the art which makes is one, and
the art which uses is another. Although they have to do with the same,
they are divided: for the art which makes and the art which plays on
the lyre differ widely from one another. Am I not right?

  He agreed.

  And clearly we do not want the art of the flute-maker; this is
only another of the same sort?

  He assented.

  But suppose, I said, that we were to learn the art of making
speeches-would that be the art which would make us happy?

  I should say no, rejoined Cleinias.

  And why should you say so? I asked.

  I see, he replied, that there are some composers of speeches who
do not know how to use the speeches which they make, just as the
makers of lyres do not know how to use the lyres; and also some who
are of themselves unable to compose speeches, but are able to use
the speeches which the others make for them; and this proves that
the art of making speeches is not the same as the art of using them.

  Yes, I said; and I take your words to be a sufficient proof that the
art of making speeches is not one which will make a man happy. And yet
I did think that the art which we have so long been seeking might be
discovered in that direction; for the composers of speeches,
whenever I meet them, always appear to me to be very extraordinary
men, Cleinias, and their art is lofty and divine, and no wonder. For
their art is a part of the great art of enchantment, and hardly, if at
all, inferior to it: and whereas the art of the enchanter is a mode of
charming snakes and spiders and scorpions, and other monsters and
pests, this art of theirs acts upon dicasts and ecclesiasts and bodies
of men, for the charming and pacifying of them. Do you agree with me?

  Yes, he said, I think that you are quite right.

  Whither then shall we go, I said, and to what art shall we have
recourse?

  I do not see my way, he said.

  But I think that I do, I replied.

  And what is your notion? asked Cleinias.

  I think that the art of the general is above all others the one of
which the possession is most likely to make a man happy.

  I do not think so, he said.

  Why not? I said.

  The art of the general is surely an art of hunting mankind.

  What of that? I said.

  Why, he said, no art of hunting extends beyond hunting and
capturing; and when the prey is taken the huntsman or fisherman cannot
use it; but they hand it over to the cook, and the geometricians and
astronomers and calculators (who all belong to the hunting class,
for they do not make their diagrams, but only find out that which
was previously contained in them)-they, I say, not being able to use
but only to catch their prey, hand over their inventions to the
dialectician to be applied by him, if they have any sense in them.

  Good, I said, fairest and wisest Cleinias. And is this true?

  Certainly, he said; just as a general when he takes a city or a camp
hands over his new acquisition to the statesman, for he does not
know how to use them himself; or as the quail-taker transfers the
quails to the keeper of them. If we are looking for the art which is
to make us blessed, and which is able to use that which it makes or
takes, the art of the general is not the one, and some other must be
found.

  Cri. And do you mean, Socrates, that the youngster said all this?

  Soc. Are you incredulous, Crito?

  Cri. Indeed, I am; for if he did say so, then in my opinion he needs
neither Euthydemus nor any one else to be his instructor.

  Soc. Perhaps I may have forgotten, and Ctesippus was the real
answerer.

  Cri. Ctesippus! nonsense.

  Soc. All I know is that I heard these words, and that they were
not spoken either by Euthydemus or Dionysodorus. I dare say, my good
Crito, that they may have been spoken by some superior person: that
I heard them I am certain.

  Cri. Yes, indeed, Socrates, by some one a good deal superior, as I
should be disposed to think. But did you carry the search any further,
and did you find the art which you were seeking?

  Soc. Find! my dear sir, no indeed. And we cut a poor figure; we were
like children after larks, always on the point of catching the art,
which was always getting away from us. But why should I repeat the
whole story? At last we came to the kingly art, and enquired whether
that gave and caused happiness, and then we got into a labyrinth,
and when we thought we were at the end, came out again at the
beginning, having still to seek as much as ever.

  Cri. How did that happen, Socrates?

  Soc. I will tell you; the kingly art was identified by us with the
political.

  Cri. Well, and what came of that?

  Soc. To this royal or political art all the arts, including the
art of the general, seemed to render up the supremacy, that being
the only one which knew how to use what they produce. Here obviously
was the very art which we were seeking-the art which is the source
of good government, and which may be described, in the language of
Aeschylus, as alone sitting at the helm of the vessel of state,
piloting and governing all things, and utilizing them.

  Cri. And were you not right, Socrates?

  Soc. You shall judge, Crito, if you are willing to hear what
followed; for we resumed the enquiry, and a question of this sort
was asked: Does the kingly art, having this supreme authority, do
anything for us? To be sure, was the answer. And would not you, Crito,
say the same?

  Cri. Yes, I should.

  Soc. And what would you say that the kingly art does? If medicine
were supposed to have supreme authority over the subordinate arts, and
I were to ask you a similar question about that, you would say-it
produces health?

  Cri. I should.

  Soc. And what of your own art of husbandry, supposing that to have
supreme authority over the subject arts-what does that do? Does it not
supply us with the fruits of the earth?

  Cri. Yes.

  Soc. And what does the kingly art do when invested with supreme
power? Perhaps you may not be ready with an answer?

  Cri. Indeed I am not, Socrates.

  Soc. No more were we, Crito. But at any rate you know that if this
is the art which we were seeking, it ought to be useful.

  Cri. Certainly.

  Soc. And surely it ought to do us some good?

  Cri. Certainly, Socrates.

  Soc. And Cleinias and I had arrived at the conclusion that knowledge
of some kind is the only good.

  Cri. Yes, that was what you were saying.

  Soc. All the other results of politics, and they are many, as for
example, wealth, freedom, tranquillity, were neither good nor evil
in themselves; but the political science ought to make us wise, and
impart knowledge to us, if that is the science which is likely to do
us good, and make us happy.

  Cri. Yes; that was the conclusion at which you had arrived,
according to your report of the conversation.

  Soc. And does the kingly art make men wise and good?

  Cri. Why not, Socrates?

  Soc. What, all men, and in every respect? and teach them all the
arts,-carpentering, and cobbling, and the rest of them?

  Cri. I think not, Socrates.

  Soc. But then what is this knowledge, and what are we to do with it?
For it is not the source of any works which are neither good nor evil,
and gives no knowledge, but the knowledge of itself; what then can
it be, and what are we to do with it? Shall we say, Crito, that it
is the knowledge by which we are to make other men good?

  Cri. By all means.

  Soc. And in what will they be good and useful? Shall we repeat
that they will make others good, and that these others will make
others again, without ever determining in what they are to be good;
for we have put aside the results of politics, as they are called.
This is the old, old song over again; and we are just as far as
ever, if not farther, from the knowledge of the art or science of
happiness.

  .Cri. Indeed, Socrates, you do appear to have got into a great
perplexity.

  Soc. Thereupon, Crito, seeing that I was on the point of
shipwreck, I lifted up my voice, and earnestly entreated and called
upon the strangers to save me and the youth from the whirlpool of
the argument; they were our Castor and Pollux, I said, and they should
be serious, and show us in sober earnest what that knowledge was which
would enable us to pass the rest of our lives in happiness.

  Cri. And did Euthydemus show you this knowledge?

  Soc. Yes, indeed; he proceeded in a lofty strain to the following
effect: Would you rather, Socrates, said he, that I should show you
this knowledge about which you have been doubting, or shall I prove
that you already have it?

  What, I said, are you blessed with such a power as this?

  Indeed I am.

  Then I would much rather that you should prove me to have such a
knowledge; at my time of life that will be more agreeable than
having to learn.

  Then tell me, he said, do you know anything?

  Yes, I said, I know many things, but not anything of much
importance.

  That will do, he said: And would you admit that anything is what
it is, and at the same time is not what it is?

  Certainly not.

  And did you not say that you knew something?

  I did.

  If you know, you are knowing.

  Certainly, of the knowledge which I have.

  That makes no difference;-and must you not, if you are knowing, know
all things?

  Certainly not, I said, for there are many other things which I do
not know.

  And if you do not know, you are not knowing.

  Yes, friend, of that which I do not know.

  Still you are not knowing, and you said just now that you were
knowing; and therefore you are and are not at the same time, and in
reference to the same things.

  A pretty clatter, as men say, Euthydemus, this of yours! and will
you explain how I possess that knowledge for which we were seeking? Do
you mean to say that the same thing cannot be and also not be; and
therefore, since I know one thing, that I know all, for I cannot be
knowing and not knowing at the same time, and if I know all things,
then I must have the knowledge for which we are seeking-May I assume
this to be your ingenious notion?

  Out of your own mouth, Socrates, you are convicted, he said.

  Well, but, Euthydemus, I said, has that never happened to you? for
if I am only in the same case with you and our beloved Dionysodorus, I
cannot complain. Tell me, then, you two, do you not know some
things, and not know others?

  Certainly not, Socrates, said Dionysodorus.

  What do you mean, I said; do you know nothing?

  Nay, he replied, we do know something.

  Then, I said, you know all things, if you know anything?

  Yes, all things, he said; and that is as true of you as of us.

  O, indeed, I said, what a wonderful thing, and what a great
blessing! And do all other men know all things or nothing?

  Certainly, he replied; they cannot know some things, and not know
others, and be at the same time knowing and not knowing.

  Then what is the inference? I said.

  They all know all things, he replied, if they know one thing.

  O heavens, Dionysodorus, I said, I see now that you are in
earnest; hardly have I got you to that point. And do you really and
truly know all things, including carpentering and leather cutting?

  Certainly, he said.

  And do you know stitching?

  Yes, by the gods, we do, and cobbling, too.

  And do you know things such as the numbers of the stars and of the
sand?

  Certainly; did you think we should say no to that?

  By Zeus, said Ctesippus, interrupting, I only wish that you would
give me some proof which would enable me to know whether you speak
truly.

  What proof shall I give you? he said.

  Will you tell me how many teeth Euthydemus has? and Euthydemus shall
tell how many teeth you have.

  Will you not take our word that we know all things?

  Certainly not, said Ctesippus: you must further tell us this one
thing, and then we shall know that you are speak the truth; if you
tell us the number, and we count them, and you are found to be
right, we will believe the rest. They fancied that Ctesippus was
making game of them, and they refused, and they would only say in
answer to each of his questions, that they knew all things. For at
last Ctesippus began to throw off all restraint; no question in fact
was too bad for him; he would ask them if they knew the foulest
things, and they, like wild boars, came rushing on his blows, and
fearlessly replied that they did. At last, Crito, I too was carried
away by my incredulity, and asked Euthydemus whether Dionysodorus
could dance.

  Certainly, he replied.

  And can he vault among swords, and turn upon a wheel, at his age?
has he got to such a height of skill as that?

  He can do anything, he said.

  And did you always know this?

  Always, he said.

  When you were children, and at your birth?

  They both said that they did.

  This we could not believe. And Euthydemus said: You are incredulous,
Socrates.

  Yes, I said, and I might well be incredulous, if I did not know
you to be wise men.

  But if you will answer, he said, I will make you confess to
similar marvels.

  Well, I said, there is nothing that I should like better than to
be self-convicted of this, for if I am really a wise man, which I
never knew before, and you will prove to me that I know and have
always known all things, nothing in life would be a greater gain to
me.

  Answer then, he said.

  Ask, I said, and I will answer.

  Do you know something, Socrates, or nothing?

  Something, I said.

  And do you know with what you know, or with something else?

  With what I know; and I suppose that you mean with my soul?

  Are you not ashamed, Socrates, of asking a question when you are
asked one?

  Well, I said; but then what am I to do? for I will do whatever you
bid; when I do not know what you are asking, you tell me to answer
nevertheless, and not to ask again.

  Why, you surely have some notion of my meaning, he said.

  Yes, I replied.

  Well, then, answer according to your notion of my meaning.

  Yes, I said; but if the question which you ask in one sense is
understood and answered by me in another, will that please you-if I
answer what is not to the point?

  That will please me very well; but will not please you equally well,
as I imagine.

  I certainly will not answer unless I understand you, I said.

  You will not answer, he said, according to your view of the meaning,
because you will be prating, and are an ancient.

  Now I saw that he was getting angry with me for drawing
distinctions, when he wanted to catch me in his springes of words. And
I remembered that Connus was always angry with me when I opposed
him, and then he neglected me, because he thought that I was stupid;
and as I was intending to go to Euthydemus as a pupil, I reflected
that I had better let him have his way, as he might think me a
blockhead, and refuse to take me. So I said: You are a far better
dialectician than myself, Euthydemus, for I have never made a
profession of the art, and therefore do as you say; ask your questions
once more, and I will answer.

  Answer then, he said, again, whether you know what you know with
something, or with nothing.

  Yes, I said; I know with my soul.

  The man will answer more than the question; for I did not ask you,
he said, with what you know, but whether you know with something.

  Again I replied, Through ignorance I have answered too much, but I
hope that you will forgive me. And now I will answer simply that I
always know what I know with something.

  And is that something, he rejoined, always the same, or sometimes
one thing, and sometimes another thing?

  Always, I replied, when I know, I know with this.

  Will you not cease adding to your answers?

  My fear is that this word "always" may get us into trouble.

  You, perhaps, but certainly not us. And now answer: Do you always
know with this?

  Always; since I am required to withdraw the words "when I know."

  You always know with this, or, always knowing, do you know some
things with this, and some things with something else, or do you
know all things with this?

  All that I know, I replied, I know with this.

  There again, Socrates, he said, the addition is superfluous.

  Well, then, I said, I will take away the words that I know."

  Nay, take nothing away; I desire no favours of you; but let me
ask: Would you be able to know all things, if you did not know all
things?

  Quite impossible.

  And now, he said, you may add on whatever you like, for you
confess that you know all things.

  I suppose that is true, I said, if my qualification implied in the
words "that I know" is not allowed to stand; and so I do know all
things.

  And have you not admitted that you always know all things with
that which you know, whether you make the addition of "when you know
them" or not? for you have acknowledged that you have always and at
once known all things, that is to say, when you were a child, and at
your birth, and when you were growing up, and before you were born,
and before the heaven and earth existed, you knew all things if you
always know them; and I swear that you shall always continue to know
all things, if I am of the mind to make you.

  But I hope that you will be of that mind, reverend Euthydemus, I
said, if you are really speaking the truth, and yet I a little doubt
your power to make good your words unless you have the help of your
brother Dionysodorus; then you may do it. Tell me now, both of you,
for although in the main I cannot doubt that I really do know all
things, when I am told so by men of your prodigious wisdom-how can I
say that I know such things, Euthydemus, as that the good are
unjust; come, do I know that or not?

  Certainly, you know that.

  What do I know?

  That the good are not unjust.

  Quite true, I said; and that I have always known; but the question
is, where did I learn that the good are unjust?

  Nowhere, said Dionysodorus.

  Then, I said, I do not know this.

  You are ruining the argument, said Euthydemus to Dionysodorus; he
will be proved not to know, and then after all he will be knowing
and not knowing at the same time.

  Dionysodorus blushed.

  I turned to the other, and said, What do you think, Euthydemus? Does
not your omniscient brother appear to you to have made a mistake?

  What, replied Dionysodorus in a moment; am I the brother of
Euthydemus?

  Thereupon I said, Please not to interrupt, my good friend, or
prevent Euthydemus from proving to me that I know the good to be
unjust; such a lesson you might at least allow me to learn.

  You are running away, Socrates, said Dionysodorus, and refusing to
answer.

  No wonder, I said, for I am not a match for one of you, and a
fortiori I must run away from two. I am no Heracles; and even Heracles
could not fight against the Hydra, who was a she-Sophist, and had
the wit to shoot up many new heads when one of them was cut off;
especially when he saw a second monster of a sea-crab, who was also
a Sophist, and appeared to have newly arrived from a sea-voyage,
bearing down upon him from the left, opening his mouth and biting.
When the monster was growing troublesome he called Iolaus, his nephew,
to his help, who ably succoured him; but if my Iolaus, who is my
brother Patrocles [the statuary], were to come, he would only make a
bad business worse.

  And now that you have delivered yourself of this strain, said
Dionysodorus, will you inform me whether Iolaus was the nephew of
Heracles any more than he is yours?

  I suppose that I had best answer you, Dionysodorus, I said, for
you will insist on asking that I pretty well know-out of envy, in
order to prevent me from learning the wisdom of Euthydemus.

  Then answer me, he said.

  Well then, I said, I can only reply that Iolaus was not my nephew at
all, but the nephew of Heracles; and his father was not my brother
Patrocles, but Iphicles, who has a name rather like his, and was the
brother of Heracles.

  And is Patrocles, he said, your brother?

  Yes, I said, he is my half-brother, the son of my mother, but not of
my father.

  Then he is and is not your brother.

  Not by the same father, my good man, I said, for Chaeredemus was his
father, and mine was Sophroniscus.

  And was Sophroniscus a father, and Chaeredemus also?

  Yes, I said; the former was my father, and the latter his.

  Then, he said, Chaeredemus is not a father.

  He is not my father, I said.

  But can a father be other than a father? or are you the same as a
stone?

  I certainly do not think that I am a stone, I said, though I am
afraid that you may prove me to be one.

  Are you not other than a stone?

  I am.

  And being other than a stone, you are not a stone; and being other
than gold, you are not gold?

  Very true.

  And so Chaeredemus, he said, being other than a father, is not a
father?

  I suppose that he is not a father, I replied.

  For if, said Euthydemus, taking up the argument, Chaeredemus is a
father, then Sophroniscus, being other than a father, is not a father;
and you, Socrates, are without a father.

  Ctesippus, here taking up the argument, said: And is not your father
in the same case, for he is other than my father?

  Assuredly not, said Euthydemus.

  Then he is the same?

  He is the same.

  I cannot say that I like the connection; but is he only my father,
Euthydemus, or is he the father of all other men?

  Of all other men, he replied. Do you suppose the same person to be a
father and not a father?

  Certainly, I did so imagine, said Ctesippus.

  And do you suppose that gold is not gold, or that a man is not a
man?

  They are not "in pari materia," Euthydemus, said Ctesippus, and
you had better take care, for it is monstrous to suppose that your
father is the father of all.

  But he is, he replied.

  What, of men only, said Ctesippus, or of horses and of all other
animals?

  Of all, he said.

  And your mother, too, is the mother of all?

  Yes, our mother too.

  Yes; and your mother has a progeny of sea-urchins then?

  Yes; and yours, he said.

  And gudgeons and puppies and pigs are your brothers?

  And yours too.

  And your papa is a dog?

  And so is yours, he said.

  If you will answer my questions, said Dionysodorus, I will soon
extract the same admissions from you, Ctesippus. You say that you have
a dog.

  Yes, a villain of a one, said Ctesippus.

  And he has puppies?

  Yes, and they are very like himself.

  And the dog is the father of them?

  Yes, he said, I certainly saw him and the mother of the puppies come
together.

  And is he not yours?

  To be sure he is.

  Then he is a father, and he is yours; ergo, he is your father, and
the puppies are your brothers.

  Let me ask you one little question more, said Dionysodorus,
quickly interposing, in order that Ctesippus might not get in his
word: You beat this dog?

  Ctesippus said, laughing, Indeed I do; and I only wish that I
could beat you instead of him.

  Then you beat your father, he said.

  I should have far more reason to beat yours, said Ctesippus; what
could he have been thinking of when he begat such wise sons? much good
has this father of you and your brethren the puppies got out of this
wisdom of yours.

  But neither he nor you, Ctesippus, have any need of much good.

  And have you no need, Euthydemus? he said.

  Neither I nor any other man; for tell me now, Ctesippus, if you
think it good or evil for a man who is sick to drink medicine when
he wants it; or to go to war armed rather than unarmed.

  Good, I say. And yet I know that I am going to be caught in one of
your charming puzzles.

  That, he replied, you will discover, if you answer; since you
admit medicine to be good for a man to drink, when wanted, must it not
be good for him to drink as much as possible; when he takes his
medicine, a cartload of hellebore will not be too much for him?

  Ctesippus said: Quite so, Euthydemus, that is to say, if he who
drinks is as big as the statue of Delphi.

  And seeing that in war to have arms is a good thing, he ought to
have as many spears and shields as possible?

  Very true, said Ctesippus; and do you think, Euthydemus, that he
ought to have one shield only, and one spear?

  I do.

  And would you arm Geryon and Briarcus in that way? Considering
that you and your companion fight in armour, I thought that you
would have known better.... Here Euthydemus held his peace, but
Dionysodorus returned to the previous answer of Ctesippus and said:-

  Do you not think that the possession of gold is a good thing?

  Yes, said Ctesippus, and the more the better.

  And to have money everywhere and always is a good?

  Certain a great good, he said.

  And you admit gold to be a good?

  Certainly, he replied.

  And ought not a man then to have gold everywhere and always, and
as much as possible in himself, and may he not be deemed the
happiest of men who has three talents of gold in his belly, and a
talent in his pate, and a stater of gold in either eye?

  Yes, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus; and the Scythians reckon those
who have gold in their own skulls to be the happiest and bravest of
men (that is only another instance of your manner of speaking about
the dog and father), and what is still more extraordinary, they
drink out of their own skulls gilt and see the inside of them, and
hold their own head in their hands.

  And do the Scythians and others see that which has the quality of
vision, or that which has not? said Euthydemus.

  That which has the quality of vision clearly.

  And you also see that which has the quality Of vision? he said.

  Yes, I do.

  Then do you see our garments?

  Yes.

  Then our garments have the quality of vision.

  They can see to any extent, said Ctesippus.

  What can they see?

  Nothing; but you, my sweet man, may perhaps imagine that they do not
see; and certainly, Euthydemus, you do seem to me to have been
caught napping when you were not asleep, and that if it be possible to
speak and say nothing-you are doing so.

  And may there not be a silence of the speaker? said Dionysodorus.

  Impossible, said Ctesippus.

  Or a speaking of the silent?

  That is still more impossible, he said.

  But when you speak of stones, wood, iron bars, do you not speak of
the silent?

  Not when I pass a smithy; for then the iron bars make a tremendous
noise and outcry if they are touched: so that here your wisdom is
strangely mistaken, please, however, to tell me how you can be
silent when speaking (I thought that Ctesippus was put upon his mettle
because Cleinias was present).

  When you are silent, said Euthydemus, is there not a silence of
all things?

  Yes, he said.

  But if speaking things are included in all things, then the speaking
are silent.

  What, said Ctesippus; then all things are not silent?

  Certainly not, said Euthydemus.

  Then, my good friend, do they all speak?

  Yes; those which speak.

  Nay, said Ctesippus, but the question which I ask is whether all
things are silent or speak?

  Neither and both, said Dionysodorus, quickly interposing; I am
sure that you will be "nonplussed" at that answer.

  Here Ctesippus, as his manner was, burst into a roar of laughter; he
said, That brother of yours, Euthydemus, has got into a dilemma; all
is over with him. This delighted Cleinias, whose laughter made
Ctesippus ten times as uproarious; but I cannot help thinking that the
rogue must have picked up this answer from them; for there has been no
wisdom like theirs in our time. Why do you laugh, Cleinias, I said, at
such solemn and beautiful things?

  Why, Socrates, said Dionysodorus, did you ever see a beautiful
thing?

  Yes, Dionysodorus, I replied, I have seen many.

  Were they other than the beautiful, or the same as the beautiful?

  Now I was in a great quandary at having to answer this question, and
I thought that I was rightly served for having opened my mouth at all:
I said however, They are not the same as absolute beauty, but they
have beauty present with each of them.

  And are you an ox because an ox is present with you, or are you
Dionysodorus, because Dionysodorus is present with you?

  God forbid, I replied.

  But how, he said, by reason of one thing being present with another,
will one thing be another?

  Is that your difficulty? I said. For I was beginning to imitate
their skill, on which my heart was set.

  Of course, he replied, I and all the world are in a difficulty about
the non-existent.

  What do you mean, Dionysodorus? I said. Is not the honourable
honourable and the base base?

  That, he said, is as I please.

  And do you please?

  Yes, he said.

  And you will admit that the same is the same, and the other other;
for surely the other is not the same; I should imagine that even a
child will hardly deny the other to be other. But I think,
Dionysodorus, that you must have intentionally missed the last
question; for in general you and your brother seem to me to be good
workmen in your own department, and to do the dialectician's
business excellently well.

  What, said he, is the business of a good workman? tell me, in the
first place, whose business is hammering?

  The smith's.

  And whose the making of pots?

  The potter's.

  And who has to kill and skin and mince and boil and roast?

  The cook, I said.

  And if a man does his business he does rightly?

  Certainly.

  And the business of the cook is to cut up and skin; you have
admitted that?

  Yes, I have admitted that, but you must not be too hard upon me.

  Then if some one were to kill, mince, boil, roast the cook, he would
do his business, and if he were to hammer the smith, and make a pot of
the potter, he would do their business.

  Poseidon, I said, this is the crown of wisdom; can I ever hope to
have such wisdom of my own?

  And would you be able, Socrates, to recognize this wisdom when it
has become your own?

  Certainly, I said, if you will allow me.

  What, he said, do you think that you know what is your own?

  Yes, I do, subject to your correction; for you are the bottom, and
Euthydemus is the top, of all my wisdom.

  Is not that which you would deem your own, he said, that which you
have in your own power, and which you are able to use as you would
desire, for example, an ox or a sheep would you not think that which
you could sell and give and sacrifice to any god whom you pleased,
to be your own, and that which you could not give or sell or sacrifice
you would think not to be in your own power?

  Yes, I said (for I was certain that something good would come out of
the questions, which I was impatient to hear); yes, such things, and
such things only are mine.

  Yes, he said, and you would mean by animals living beings?

  Yes, I said.

  You agree then, that-those animals only are yours with which you
have the power to do all these things which I was just naming?

  I agree.

  Then, after a pause, in which he seemed to be lost in the
contemplation of something great, he said: Tell me, Socrates, have you
an ancestral Zeus? Here, anticipating the final move, like a person
caught in a net, who gives a desperate twist that he may get away, I
said: No, Dionysodorus, I have not.

  What a miserable man you must be then, he said; you are not an
Athenian at all if you have no ancestral gods or temples, or any other
mark of gentility.

  Nay, Dionysodorus, I said, do not be rough; good words, if you
please; in the way of religion I have altars and temples, domestic and
ancestral, and all that other Athenians have.

  And have not other Athenians, he said, an ancestral Zeus?

  That name, I said, is not to be found among the Ionians, whether
colonists or citizens of Athens; an ancestral Apollo there is, who
is the father of Ion, and a family Zeus, and a Zeus guardian of the
phratry, and an Athene guardian of the phratry. But the name of
ancestral Zeus is unknown to us.

  No matter, said Dionysodorus, for you admit that you have Apollo,
Zeus, and Athene.

  Certainly, I said.

  And they are your gods, he said.

  Yes, I said, my lords and ancestors.

  At any rate they are yours, he said, did you not admit that?

  I did, I said; what is going to happen to me?

  And are not these gods animals? for you admit that all things
which have life are animals; and have not these gods life?

  They have life, I said.

  Then are they not animals?

  They are animals, I said.

  And you admitted that of animals those are yours which you could
give away or sell or offer in sacrifice, as you pleased?

  I did admit that, Euthydemus, and I have no way of escape.

  Well then, said he, if you admit that Zeus and the other gods are
yours, can you sell them or give them away or do what you will with
them, as you would with other animals?

  At this I was quite struck dumb, Crito, and lay prostrate. Ctesippus
came to the rescue.

  Bravo, Heracles, brave words, said he.

  Bravo Heracles, or is Heracles a Bravo? said Dionysodorus.

  Poseidon, said Ctesippus, what awful distinctions. I will have no
more of them; the pair are invincible.

  Then, my dear Crito, there was universal applause of the speakers
and their words, and what with laughing and clapping of hands and
rejoicings the two men were quite overpowered; for hitherto their
partisans only had cheered at each successive hit, but now the whole
company shouted with delight until the columns of the Lyceum
returned the sound, seeming to sympathize in their joy. To such a
pitch was I affected myself, that I made a speech, in which I
acknowledged that I had never seen the like of their wisdom; I was
their devoted servant, and fell to praising and admiring of them. What
marvellous dexterity of wit, I said, enabled you to acquire this great
perfection in such a short time? There is much, indeed, to admire in
your words, Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, but there is nothing that I
admire more than your magnanimous disregard of any opinion-whether
of the many, or of the grave and reverend seigniors-you regard only
those who are like yourselves. And I do verily believe that there
are few who are like you, and who would approve of such arguments; the
majority of mankind are so ignorant of their value, that they would be
more ashamed of employing them in the refutation of others than of
being refuted by them. I must further express my approval of your kind
and public-spirited denial of all differences, whether of good and
evil, white or black, or any other; the result of which is that, as
you say, every mouth is sewn up, not excepting your own, which
graciously follows the example of others; and thus all ground of
offence is taken away. But what appears to me to be more than all
is, that this art and invention of yours has been so admirably
contrived by you, that in a very short time it can be imparted to
any one. I observed that Ctesippus learned to imitate you in no
time. Now this quickness of attainment is an excellent thing; but at
the same time I would advise you not to have any more public
entertainments; there is a danger that men may undervalue an art which
they have so easy an opportunity of acquiring; the exhibition would be
best of all, if the discussion were confined to your two selves; but
if there must be an audience, let him only be present who is willing
to pay a handsome fee;-you should be careful of this;-and if you are
wise, you will also bid your disciples discourse with no man but you
and themselves. For only what is rare is valuable; and "water," which,
as Pindar says, is the "best of all things," is also the cheapest. And
now I have only to request that you will receive Cleinias and me among
your pupils.

  Such was the discussion, Crito; and after a few more words had
passed between us we went away. I hope that you will come to them with
me, since they say that they are able to teach any one who will give
them money; no age or want of capacity is an impediment. And I must
repeat one thing which they said, for your especial benefit,-that
the learning of their art did not at all interfere with the business
of money-making.

  Cri. Truly, Socrates, though I am curious and ready to learn, yet
I fear that I am not like minded with Euthydemus, but one of the other
sort, who, as you were saying, would rather be refuted by such
arguments than use them in refutation of others. And though I may
appear ridiculous in venturing to advise you, I think that you may
as well hear what was said to me by a man of very considerable
pretensions-he was a professor of legal oratory-who came away from you
while I was walking up and down. "Crito," said he to me, "are you
giving no attention to these wise men?" "No, indeed," I said to him;
"I could not get within hearing of them-there was such a crowd."
"You would have heard something worth hearing if you had." "What was
that?" I said. "You would have heard the greatest masters of the art
of rhetoric discoursing." "And what did you think of them?" I said.
"What did I think of them?" he said:-"theirs was the sort of discourse
which anybody might hear from men who were playing the fool, and
making much ado about nothing. "That was the expression which he used.
"Surely," I said, "philosophy is a charming thing." "Charming!" he
said; "what simplicity! philosophy is nought; and I think that if
you had been present you would have been ashamed of your friend-his
conduct was so very strange in placing himself at the mercy of men who
care not what they say, and fasten upon every word. And these, as I
was telling you, are supposed to be the most eminent professors of
their time. But the truth is, Crito, that the study itself and the men
themselves are utterly mean and ridiculous." Now censure of the
pursuit, Socrates, whether coming from him or from others, appears
to me to be undeserved; but as to the impropriety of holding a
public discussion with such men, there, I confess that, in my opinion,
he was in the right.

  Soc. O Crito, they are marvellous men; but what was I going to
say? First of all let me know;-What manner of man was he who came up
to you and censured philosophy; was he an orator who himself practises
in the courts, or an instructor of orators, who makes the speeches
with which they do battle?

  Cri. He was certainly not an orator, and I doubt whether he had ever
been into court; but they say that he knows the business, and is a
clever man, and composes wonderful speeches.

  Soc. Now I understand, Crito; he is one of an amphibious class, whom
I was on the point of mentioning-one of those whom Prodicus
describes as on the border-ground between philosophers and
statesmen-they think that they are the wisest of all men, and that
they are generally esteemed the wisest; nothing but the rivalry of the
philosophers stands in their way; and they are of the opinion that
if they can prove the philosophers to be good for nothing, no one will
dispute their title to the palm of wisdom, for that they are
themselves really the wisest, although they are apt to be mauled by
Euthydemus and his friends, when they get hold of them in
conversation. This opinion which they entertain of their own wisdom is
very natural; for they have a certain amount of philosophy, and a
certain amount of political wisdom; there is reason in what they
say, for they argue that they have just enough of both, and so they
keep out-of the way all risks and conflicts and reap the fruits of
their wisdom.

  Cri. What do you say of them, Socrates? There is certainly something
specious in that notion of theirs.

  Soc. Yes, Crito, there is more speciousness than truth; they
cannot be made to understand the nature of intermediates. For all
persons or things, which are intermediate between two other things,
and participate in both of them-if one of these two things is good and
the other evil, are better than the one and worse than the other;
but if they are in a mean between two good things which do not tend to
the same end, they fall short of either of their component elements in
the attainment of their ends. Only in the case when the two
component elements which do not tend to the same end are evil is the
participant better than either. Now, if philosophy and political
action are both good, but tend to different ends, and they participate
in both, and are in a mean between them, then they are talking
nonsense, for they are worse than either; or, if the one be good and
the other evil, they are better than the one and worse than the other;
only on the supposition that they are both evil could there be any
truth in what they say. I do not think that they will admit that their
two pursuits are either wholly or partly evil; but the truth is,
that these philosopher-politicians who aim at both fall short of
both in the attainment of their respective ends, and are really third,
although they would like to stand first. There is no need, however, to
be angry at this ambition of theirs-which may be forgiven; for every
man ought to be loved who says and manfully pursues and works out
anything which is at all like wisdom: at the same time we shall do
well to see them as they really are.

  Cri. I have often told you, Socrates, that I am in a constant
difficulty about my two sons. What am I to do with them? There is no
hurry about the younger one, who is only a child; but the other,
Critobulus, is getting on, and needs some one who will improve him.
I cannot help thinking, when I hear you talk, that there is a sort
of madness in many of our anxieties about our children:-in the first
place, about marrying a wife of good family to be the mother of
them, and then about heaping up money for them-and yet taking no
care about their education. But then again, when I contemplate any
of those who pretend to educate others, I am amazed. To me, if I am to
confess the truth, they all seem to be such outrageous beings: so that
I do not know how I can advise the youth to study philosophy.

  Soc. Dear Crito, do you not know that in every profession the
inferior sort are numerous and good for nothing, and the good are
few and beyond all price: for example, are not gymnastic and
rhetoric and money-making and the art of the general, noble arts?

  Cri. Certainly they are, in my judgment.

  Soc. Well, and do you not see that in each of these arts the many
are ridiculous performers?

  Cri. Yes, indeed, that is very true.

  Soc. And will you on this account shun all these pursuits yourself
and refuse to allow them to your son?

  Cri. That would not be reasonable, Socrates.

  Soc. Do you then be reasonable, Crito, and do not mind whether the
teachers of philosophy are good or bad, but think only of philosophy
herself. Try and examine her well and truly, and if she be evil seek
to turn away all men from her, and not your sons only; but if she be
what I believe that she is, then follow her and serve her, you and
your house, as the saying is, and be of good cheer.

                           -THE END-



  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: SOCRATES; EUTHYPHRO

  Scene: The Porch of the King Archon

  Euthyphro. Why have you left the Lyceum, Socrates? and what are
you doing in the Porch of the King Archon? Surely you cannot be
concerned in a suit before the King, like myself?

  Socrates. Not in a suit, Euthyphro; impeachment is the word which
the Athenians use.

  Euth. What! I suppose that some one has been prosecuting you, for
I cannot believe that you are the prosecutor of another.

  Soc. Certainly not.

  Euth. Then some one else has been prosecuting you?

  Soc. Yes.

  Euth. And who is he?

  Soc. A young man who is little known, Euthyphro; and I hardly know
him: his name is Meletus, and he is of the deme of Pitthis. Perhaps
you may remember his appearance; he has a beak, and long straight
hair, and a beard which is ill grown.

  Euth. No, I do not remember him, Socrates. But what is the charge
which he brings against you?

  Soc. What is the charge? Well, a very serious charge, which shows
a good deal of character in the young man, and for which he is
certainly not to be despised. He says he knows how the youth are
corrupted and who are their corruptors. I fancy that he must be a wise
man, and seeing that I am the reverse of a wise man, he has found me
out, and is going to accuse me of corrupting his young friends. And of
this our mother the state is to be the judge. Of all our political men
he is the only one who seems to me to begin in the right way, with the
cultivation of virtue in youth; like a good husbandman, he makes the
young shoots his first care, and clears away us who are the destroyers
of them. This is only the first step; he will afterwards attend to the
elder branches; and if he goes on as he has begun, he will be a very
great public benefactor.

  Euth. I hope that he may; but I rather fear, Socrates, that the
opposite will turn out to be the truth. My opinion is that in
attacking you he is simply aiming a blow at the foundation of the
state. But in what way does he say that you corrupt the young?

  Soc. He brings a wonderful accusation against me, which at first
hearing excites surprise: he says that I am a poet or maker of gods,
and that I invent new gods and deny the existence of old ones; this is
the ground of his indictment.

  Euth. I understand, Socrates; he means to attack you about the
familiar sign which occasionally, as you say, comes to you. He
thinks that you are a neologian, and he is going to have you up before
the court for this. He knows that such a charge is readily received by
the world, as I myself know too well; for when I speak in the assembly
about divine things, and foretell the future to them, they laugh at me
and think me a madman. Yet every word that I say is true. But they are
jealous of us all; and we must be brave and go at them.

  Soc. Their laughter, friend Euthyphro, is not a matter of much
consequence. For a man may be thought wise; but the Athenians, I
suspect, do not much trouble themselves about him until he begins to
impart his wisdom to others, and then for some reason or other,
perhaps, as you say, from jealousy, they are angry.

  Euth. I am never likely to try their temper in this way.

  Soc. I dare say not, for you are reserved in your behaviour, and
seldom impart your wisdom. But I have a benevolent habit of pouring
out myself to everybody, and would even pay for a listener, and I am
afraid that the Athenians may think me too talkative. Now if, as I was
saying, they would only laugh at me, as you say that they laugh at
you, the time might pass gaily enough in the court; but perhaps they
may be in earnest, and then what the end will be you soothsayers
only can predict.

  Euth. I dare say that the affair will end in nothing, Socrates,
and that you will win your cause; and I think that I shall win my own.

  Soc. And what is your suit, Euthyphro? are you the pursuer or the
defendant?

  Euth. I am the pursuer.

  Soc. Of whom?

  Euth. You will think me mad when I tell you.

  Soc. Why, has the fugitive wings?

  Euth. Nay, he is not very volatile at his time of life.

  Soc. Who is he?

  Euth. My father.

  Soc. Your father! my good man?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. And of what is he accused?

  Euth. Of murder, Socrates.

  Soc. By the powers, Euthyphro! how little does the common herd
know of the nature of right and truth. A man must be an
extraordinary man, and have made great strides in wisdom, before he
could have seen his way to bring such an action.

  Euth. Indeed, Socrates, he must.

  Soc. I suppose that the man whom your father murdered was one of
your relatives-clearly he was; for if he had been a stranger you would
never have thought of prosecuting him.

  Euth. I am amused, Socrates, at your making a distinction between
one who is a relation and one who is not a relation; for surely the
pollution is the same in either case, if you knowingly associate
with the murderer when you ought to clear yourself and him by
proceeding against him. The real question is whether the murdered
man has been justly slain. If justly, then your duty is to let the
matter alone; but if unjustly, then even if the murderer lives under
the same roof with you and eats at the same table, proceed against
him. Now the man who is dead was a poor dependent of mine who worked
for us as a field labourer on our farm in Naxos, and one day in a
fit of drunken passion he got into a quarrel with one of our
domestic servants and slew him. My father bound him hand and foot
and threw him into a ditch, and then sent to Athens to ask of a
diviner what he should do with him. Meanwhile he never attended to him
and took no care about him, for he regarded him as a murderer; and
thought that no great harm would be done even if he did die. Now
this was just what happened. For such was the effect of cold and
hunger and chains upon him, that before the messenger returned from
the diviner, he was dead. And my father and family are angry with me
for taking the part of the murderer and prosecuting my father. They
say that he did not kill him, and that if he did, dead man was but a
murderer, and I ought not to take any notice, for that a son is
impious who prosecutes a father. Which shows, Socrates, how little
they know what the gods think about piety and impiety.

  Soc. Good heavens, Euthyphro! and is your knowledge of religion
and of things pious and impious so very exact, that, supposing the
circumstances to be as you state them, you are not afraid lest you too
may be doing an impious thing in bringing an action against your
father?

  Euth. The best of Euthyphro, and that which distinguishes him,
Socrates, from other men, is his exact knowledge of all such
matters. What should I be good for without it?

  Soc. Rare friend! I think that I cannot do better than be your
disciple. Then before the trial with Meletus comes on I shall
challenge him, and say that I have always had a great interest in
religious questions, and now, as he charges me with rash
imaginations and innovations in religion, I have become your disciple.
You, Meletus, as I shall say to him, acknowledge Euthyphro to be a
great theologian, and sound in his opinions; and if you approve of him
you ought to approve of me, and not have me into court; but if you
disapprove, you should begin by indicting him who is my teacher, and
who will be the ruin, not of the young, but of the old; that is to
say, of myself whom he instructs, and of his old father whom he
admonishes and chastises. And if Meletus refuses to listen to me,
but will go on, and will not shift the indictment from me to you, I
cannot do better than repeat this challenge in the court.

  Euth. Yes, indeed, Socrates; and if he attempts to indict me I am
mistaken if I do not find a flaw in him; the court shall have a
great deal more to say to him than to me.

  Soc. And I, my dear friend, knowing this, am desirous of becoming
your disciple. For I observe that no one appears to notice you- not
even this Meletus; but his sharp eyes have found me out at once, and
he has indicted me for impiety. And therefore, I adjure you to tell me
the nature of piety and impiety, which you said that you knew so well,
and of murder, and of other offences against the gods. What are
they? Is not piety in every action always the same? and impiety,
again- is it not always the opposite of piety, and also the same with
itself, having, as impiety, one notion which includes whatever is
impious?

  Euth. To be sure, Socrates.

  Soc. And what is piety, and what is impiety?

  Euth. Piety is doing as I am doing; that is to say, prosecuting
any one who is guilty of murder, sacrilege, or of any similar
crime-whether he be your father or mother, or whoever he may be-that
makes no difference; and not to prosecute them is impiety. And
please to consider, Socrates, what a notable proof I will give you
of the truth of my words, a proof which I have already given to
others:-of the principle, I mean, that the impious, whoever he may be,
ought not to go unpunished. For do not men regard Zeus as the best and
most righteous of the gods?-and yet they admit that he bound his
father (Cronos) because he wickedly devoured his sons, and that he too
had punished his own father (Uranus) for a similar reason, in a
nameless manner. And yet when I proceed against my father, they are
angry with me. So inconsistent are they in their way of talking when
the gods are concerned, and when I am concerned.

  Soc. May not this be the reason, Euthyphro, why I am charged with
impiety-that I cannot away with these stories about the gods? and
therefore I suppose that people think me wrong. But, as you who are
well informed about them approve of them, I cannot do better than
assent to your superior wisdom. What else can I say, confessing as I
do, that I know nothing about them? Tell me, for the love of Zeus,
whether you really believe that they are true.

  Euth. Yes, Socrates; and things more wonderful still, of which the
world is in ignorance.

  Soc. And do you really believe that the gods, fought with one
another, and had dire quarrels, battles, and the like, as the poets
say, and as you may see represented in the works of great artists? The
temples are full of them; and notably the robe of Athene, which is
carried up to the Acropolis at the great Panathenaea, is embroidered
with them. Are all these tales of the gods true, Euthyphro?

  Euth. Yes, Socrates; and, as I was saying, I can tell you, if you
would like to hear them, many other things about the gods which
would quite amaze you.

  Soc. I dare say; and you shall tell me them at some other time
when I have leisure. But just at present I would rather hear from
you a more precise answer, which you have not as yet given, my friend,
to the question, What is "piety"? When asked, you only replied,
Doing as you do, charging your father with murder.

  Euth. And what I said was true, Socrates.

  Soc. No doubt, Euthyphro; but you would admit that there are many
other pious acts?

  Euth. There are.

  Soc. Remember that I did not ask you to give me two or three
examples of piety, but to explain the general idea which makes all
pious things to be pious. Do you not recollect that there was one idea
which made the impious impious, and the pious pious?

  Euth. I remember.

  Soc. Tell me what is the nature of this idea, and then I shall
have a standard to which I may look, and by which I may measure
actions, whether yours or those of any one else, and then I shall be
able to say that such and such an action is pious, such another
impious.

  Euth. I will tell you, if you like.

  Soc. I should very much like.

  Euth. Piety, then, is that which is dear to the gods, and impiety is
that which is not dear to them.

  Soc. Very good, Euthyphro; you have now given me the sort of
answer which I wanted. But whether what you say is true or not I
cannot as yet tell, although I make no doubt that you will prove the
truth of your words.

  Euth. Of course.

  Soc. Come, then, and let us examine what we are saying. That
thing or person which is dear to the gods is pious, and that thing
or person which is hateful to the gods is impious, these two being the
extreme opposites of one another. Was not that said?

  Euth. It was.

  Soc. And well said?

  Euth. Yes, Socrates, I thought so; it was certainly said.

  Soc. And further, Euthyphro, the gods were admitted to have enmities
and hatreds and differences?

  Euth. Yes, that was also said.

  Soc. And what sort of difference creates enmity and anger? Suppose
for example that you and I, my good friend, differ about a number;
do differences of this sort make us enemies and set us at variance
with one another? Do we not go at once to arithmetic, and put an end
to them by a sum?

  Euth. True.

  Soc. Or suppose that we differ about magnitudes, do we not quickly
end the differences by measuring?

  Euth. Very true.

  Soc. And we end a controversy about heavy and light by resorting
to a weighing machine?

  Euth. To be sure.

  Soc. But what differences are there which cannot be thus decided,
and which therefore make us angry and set us at enmity with one
another? I dare say the answer does not occur to you at the moment,
and therefore I will suggest that these enmities arise when the
matters of difference are the just and unjust, good and evil,
honourable and dishonourable. Are not these the points about which men
differ, and about which when we are unable satisfactorily to decide
our differences, you and I and all of us quarrel, when we do quarrel?

  Euth. Yes, Socrates, the nature of the differences about which we
quarrel is such as you describe.

  Soc. And the quarrels of the gods, noble Euthyphro, when they occur,
are of a like nature?

  Euth. Certainly they are.

  Soc. They have differences of opinion, as you say, about good and
evil, just and unjust, honourable and dishonourable: there would
have been no quarrels among them, if there had been no such
differences-would there now?

  Euth. You are quite right.

  Soc. Does not every man love that which he deems noble and just
and good, and hate the opposite of them?

  Euth. Very true.

  Soc. But, as you say, people regard the same things, some as just
and others as unjust,-about these they dispute; and so there arise
wars and fightings among them.

  Euth. Very true.

  Soc. Then the same things are hated by the gods and loved by the
gods, and are both hateful and dear to them?

  Euth. True.

  Soc. And upon this view the same things, Euthyphro, will be pious
and also impious?

  Euth. So I should suppose.

  Soc. Then, my friend, I remark with surprise that you have not
answered the question which I asked. For I certainly did not ask you
to tell me what action is both pious and impious: but now it would
seem that what is loved by the gods is also hated by them. And
therefore, Euthyphro, in thus chastising your father you may very
likely be doing what is agreeable to Zeus but disagreeable to Cronos
or Uranus, and what is acceptable to Hephaestus but unacceptable to
Here, and there may be other gods who have similar differences of
opinion.

  Euth. But I believe, Socrates, that all the gods would be agreed
as to the propriety of punishing a murderer: there would be no
difference of opinion about that.

  Soc. Well, but speaking of men, Euthyphro, did you ever hear any one
arguing that a murderer or any sort of evil-doer ought to be let off?

  Euth. I should rather say that these are the questions which they
are always arguing, especially in courts of law: they commit all sorts
of crimes, and there is nothing which they will not do or say in their
own defence.

  Soc. But do they admit their guilt, Euthyphro, and yet say that they
ought not to be punished?

  Euth. No; they do not.

  Soc. Then there are some things which they do not venture to say and
do: for they do not venture to argue that the guilty are to be
unpunished, but they deny their guilt, do they not?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. Then they do not argue that the evil-doer should not be
punished, but they argue about the fact of who the evil-doer is, and
what he did and when?

  Euth. True.

  Soc. And the gods are in the same case, if as you assert they
quarrel about just and unjust, and some of them say while others
deny that injustice is done among them. For surely neither God nor man
will ever venture to say that the doer of injustice is not to be
punished?

  Euth. That is true, Socrates, in the main.

  Soc. But they join issue about the particulars-gods and men alike;
and, if they dispute at all, they dispute about some act which is
called in question, and which by some is affirmed to be just, by
others to be unjust. Is not that true?

  Euth. Quite true.

  Soc. Well then, my dear friend Euthyphro, do tell me, for my
better instruction and information, what proof have you that in the
opinion of all the gods a servant who is guilty of murder, and is
put in chains by the master of the dead man, and dies because he is
put in chains before he who bound him can learn from the
interpreters of the gods what he ought to do with him, dies
unjustly; and that on behalf of such an one a son ought to proceed
against his father and accuse him of murder. How would you show that
all the gods absolutely agree in approving of his act? Prove to me
that they do, and I will applaud your wisdom as long as I live.

  Euth. It will be a difficult task; but I could make the matter
very dear indeed to you.

  Soc. I understand; you mean to say that I am not so quick of
apprehension as the judges: for to them you will be sure to prove that
the act is unjust, and hateful to the gods.

  Euth. Yes indeed, Socrates; at least if they will listen to me.

  Soc. But they will be sure to listen if they find that you are a
good speaker. There was a notion that came into my mind while you were
speaking; I said to myself: "Well, and what if Euthyphro does prove to
me that all the gods regarded the death of the serf as unjust, how
do I know anything more of the nature of piety and impiety? for
granting that this action may be hateful to the gods, still piety
and impiety are not adequately defined by these distinctions, for that
which is hateful to the gods has been shown to be also pleasing and
dear to them." And therefore, Euthyphro, I do not ask you to prove
this; I will suppose, if you like, that all the gods condemn and
abominate such an action. But I will amend the definition so far as to
say that what all the gods hate is impious, and what they love pious
or holy; and what some of them love and others hate is both or
neither. Shall this be our definition of piety and impiety?

  Euth. Why not, Socrates?

  Soc. Why not! certainly, as far as I am concerned, Euthyphro,
there is no reason why not. But whether this admission will greatly
assist you in the task of instructing me as you promised, is a
matter for you to consider.

  Euth. Yes, I should say that what all the gods love is pious and
holy, and the opposite which they all hate, impious.

  Soc. Ought we to enquire into the truth of this, Euthyphro, or
simply to accept the mere statement on our own authority and that of
others? What do you say?

  Euth. We should enquire; and I believe that the statement will stand
the test of enquiry.

  Soc. We shall know better, my good friend, in a little while. The
point which I should first wish to understand is whether the pious
or holy is beloved by the gods because it is holy, or holy because
it is beloved of the gods.

  Euth. I do not understand your meaning, Socrates.

  Soc. I will endeavour to explain: we, speak of carrying and we speak
of being carried, of leading and being led, seeing and being seen. You
know that in all such cases there is a difference, and you know also
in what the difference lies?

  Euth. I think that I understand.

  Soc. And is not that which is beloved distinct from that which
loves?

  Euth. Certainly.

  Soc. Well; and now tell me, is that which is carried in this state
of carrying because it is carried, or for some other reason?

  Euth. No; that is the reason.

  Soc. And the same is true of what is led and of what is seen?

  Euth. True.

  Soc. And a thing is not seen because it is visible, but
conversely, visible because it is seen; nor is a thing led because
it is in the state of being led, or carried because it is in the state
of being carried, but the converse of this. And now I think,
Euthyphro, that my meaning will be intelligible; and my meaning is,
that any state of action or passion implies previous action or
passion. It does not become because it is becoming, but it is in a
state of becoming because it becomes; neither does it suffer because
it is in a state of suffering, but it is in a state of suffering
because it suffers. Do you not agree?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. Is not that which is loved in some state either of becoming
or suffering?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. And the same holds as in the previous instances; the state of
being loved follows the act of being loved, and not the act the state.

  Euth. Certainly.

  Soc. And what do you say of piety, Euthyphro: is not piety,
according to your definition, loved by all the gods?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. Because it is pious or holy, or for some other reason?

  Euth. No, that is the reason.

  Soc. It is loved because it is holy, not holy because it is loved?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. And that which is dear to the gods is loved by them, and is
in a state to be loved of them because it is loved of them?

  Euth. Certainly.

  Soc. Then that which is dear to the gods, Euthyphro, is not holy,
nor is that which is holy loved of God, as you affirm; but they are
two different things.

  Euth. How do you mean, Socrates?

  Soc. I mean to say that the holy has been acknowledge by us to be
loved of God because it is holy, not to be holy because it is loved.

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. But that which is dear to the gods is dear to them because it
is loved by them, not loved by them because it is dear to them.

  Euth. True.

  Soc. But, friend Euthyphro, if that which is holy is the same with
that which is dear to God, and is loved because it is holy, then
that which is dear to God would have been loved as being dear to
God; but if that which dear to God is dear to him because loved by
him, then that which is holy would have been holy because loved by
him. But now you see that the reverse is the case, and that they are
quite different from one another. For one (theophiles) is of a kind to
be loved cause it is loved, and the other (osion) is loved because
it is of a kind to be loved. Thus you appear to me, Euthyphro, when
I ask you what is the essence of holiness, to offer an attribute only,
and not the essence-the attribute of being loved by all the gods.
But you still refuse to explain to me the nature of holiness. And
therefore, if you please, I will ask you not to hide your treasure,
but to tell me once more what holiness or piety really is, whether
dear to the gods or not (for that is a matter about which we will
not quarrel) and what is impiety?

  Euth. I really do not know, Socrates, how to express what I mean.
For somehow or other our arguments, on whatever ground we rest them,
seem to turn round and walk away from us.

  Soc. Your words, Euthyphro, are like the handiwork of my ancestor
Daedalus; and if I were the sayer or propounder of them, you might say
that my arguments walk away and will not remain fixed where they are
placed because I am a descendant of his. But now, since these
notions are your own, you must find some other gibe, for they
certainly, as you yourself allow, show an inclination to be on the
move.

  Euth. Nay, Socrates, I shall still say that you are the Daedalus who
sets arguments in motion; not I, certainly, but you make them move
or go round, for they would never have stirred, as far as I am
concerned.

  Soc. Then I must be a greater than Daedalus: for whereas he only
made his own inventions to move, I move those of other people as well.
And the beauty of it is, that I would rather not. For I would give the
wisdom of Daedalus, and the wealth of Tantalus, to be able to detain
them and keep them fixed. But enough of this. As I perceive that you
are lazy, I will myself endeavor to show you how you might instruct me
in the nature of piety; and I hope that you will not grudge your
labour. Tell me, then-Is not that which is pious necessarily just?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. And is, then, all which is just pious? or, is that which is
pious all just, but that which is just, only in part and not all,
pious?

  Euth. I do not understand you, Socrates.

  Soc. And yet I know that you are as much wiser than I am, as you are
younger. But, as I was saying, revered friend, the abundance of your
wisdom makes you lazy. Please to exert yourself, for there is no
real difficulty in understanding me. What I mean I may explain by an
illustration of what I do not mean. The poet (Stasinus) sings-

    Of Zeus, the author and creator of all these things,

    You will not tell: for where there is fear there is also

        reverence.

Now I disagree with this poet. Shall I tell you in what respect?

  Euth. By all means.

  Soc. I should not say that where there is fear there is also
reverence; for I am sure that many persons fear poverty and disease,
and the like evils, but I do not perceive that they reverence the
objects of their fear.

  Euth. Very true.

  Soc. But where reverence is, there is fear; for he who has a feeling
of reverence and shame about the commission of any action, fears and
is afraid of an ill reputation.

  Euth. No doubt.

  Soc. Then we are wrong in saying that where there is fear there is
also reverence; and we should say, where there is reverence there is
also fear. But there is not always reverence where there is fear;
for fear is a more extended notion, and reverence is a part of fear,
just as the odd is a part of number, and number is a more extended
notion than the odd. I suppose that you follow me now?

  Euth. Quite well.

  Soc. That was the sort of question which I meant to raise when I
asked whether the just is always the pious, or the pious always the
just; and whether there may not be justice where there is not piety;
for justice is the more extended notion of which piety is only a part.
Do you dissent?

  Euth. No, I think that you are quite right.

  Soc. Then, if piety is a part of justice, I suppose that we should
enquire what part? If you had pursued the enquiry in the previous
cases; for instance, if you had asked me what is an even number, and
what part of number the even is, I should have had no difficulty in
replying, a number which represents a figure having two equal sides.
Do you not agree?

  Euth. Yes, I quite agree.

  Soc. In like manner, I want you to tell me what part of justice is
piety or holiness, that I may be able to tell Meletus not to do me
injustice, or indict me for impiety, as I am now adequately instructed
by you in the nature of piety or holiness, and their opposites.

  Euth. Piety or holiness, Socrates, appears to me to be that part
of justice which attends to the gods, as there is the other part of
justice which attends to men.

  Soc. That is good, Euthyphro; yet still there is a little point
about which I should like to have further information, What is the
meaning of "attention"? For attention can hardly be used in the same
sense when applied to the gods as when applied to other things. For
instance, horses are said to require attention, and not every person
is able to attend to them, but only a person skilled in
horsemanship. Is it not so?

  Euth. Certainly.

  Soc. I should suppose that the art of horsemanship is the art of
attending to horses?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. Nor is every one qualified to attend to dogs, but only the
huntsman?

  Euth. True.

  Soc. And I should also conceive that the art of the huntsman is
the art of attending to dogs?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. As the art of the ox herd is the art of attending to oxen?

  Euth. Very true.

  Soc. In like manner holiness or piety is the art of attending to the
gods?-that would be your meaning, Euthyphro?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. And is not attention always designed for the good or benefit of
that to which the attention is given? As in the case of horses, you
may observe that when attended to by the horseman's art they are
benefited and improved, are they not?

  Euth. True.

  Soc. As the dogs are benefited by the huntsman's art, and the oxen
by the art of the ox herd, and all other things are tended or attended
for their good and not for their hurt?

  Euth. Certainly, not for their hurt.

  Soc. But for their good?

  Euth. Of course.

  Soc. And does piety or holiness, which has been defined to be the
art of attending to the gods, benefit or improve them? Would you say
that when you do a holy act you make any of the gods better?

  Euth. No, no; that was certainly not what I meant.

  Soc. And I, Euthyphro, never supposed that you did. I asked you
the question about the nature of the attention, because I thought that
you did not.

  Euth. You do me justice, Socrates; that is not the sort of attention
which I mean.

  Soc. Good: but I must still ask what is this attention to the gods
which is called piety?

  Euth. It is such, Socrates, as servants show to their masters.

  Soc. I understand-a sort of ministration to the gods.

  Euth. Exactly.

  Soc. Medicine is also a sort of ministration or service, having in
view the attainment of some object-would you not say of health?

  Euth. I should.

  Soc. Again, there is an art which ministers to the ship-builder with
a view to the attainment of some result?

  Euth. Yes, Socrates, with a view to the building of a ship.

  Soc. As there is an art which ministers to the housebuilder with a
view to the building of a house?

  Euth. Yes.

  Soc. And now tell me, my good friend, about the art which
ministers to the gods: what work does that help to accomplish? For you
must surely know if, as you say, you are of all men living the one who
is best instructed in religion.

  Euth. And I speak the truth, Socrates.

  Soc. Tell me then, oh tell me-what is that fair work which the
gods do by the help of our ministrations?

  Euth. Many and fair, Socrates, are the works which they do.

 Soc. Why, my friend, and so are those of a general. But the chief
of them is easily told. Would you not say that victory in war is the
chief of them?

  Euth. Certainly.

  Soc. Many and fair, too, are the works of the husbandman, if I am
not mistaken; but his chief work is the production of food from the
earth?

  Euth. Exactly.

  Soc. And of the many and fair things done by the gods, which is
the chief or principal one?

  Euth. I have told you already, Socrates, that to learn all these
things accurately will be very tiresome. Let me simply say that
piety or holiness is learning, how to please the gods in word and
deed, by prayers and sacrifices. Such piety, is the salvation of
families and states, just as the impious, which is unpleasing to the
gods, is their ruin and destruction.

  Soc. I think that you could have answered in much fewer words the
chief question which I asked, Euthyphro, if you had chosen. But I
see plainly that you are not disposed to instruct me-dearly not:
else why, when we reached the point, did you turn, aside? Had you only
answered me I should have truly learned of you by this time the-nature
of piety. Now, as the asker of a question is necessarily dependent
on the answerer, whither he leads-I must follow; and can only ask
again, what is the pious, and what is piety? Do you mean that they are
a, sort of science of praying and sacrificing?

  Euth. Yes, I do.

  Soc. And sacrificing is giving to the gods, and prayer is asking
of the gods?

  Euth. Yes, Socrates.

  Soc. Upon this view, then piety is a science of asking and giving?

   Euth. You understand me capitally, Socrates.

  Soc. Yes, my friend; the. reason is that I am a votary of your
science, and give my mind to it, and therefore nothing which you say
will be thrown away upon me. Please then to tell me, what is the
nature of this service to the gods? Do you mean that we prefer
requests and give gifts to them?

  Euth. Yes, I do.

  Soc. Is not the right way of asking to ask of them what we want?

  Euth. Certainly.

   Soc. And the right way of giving is to give to them in return
what they want of us. There would be no, in an art which gives to
any one that which he does not want.

  Euth. Very true, Socrates.

  Soc. Then piety, Euthyphro, is an art which gods and men have of
doing business with one another?

  Euth. That is an expression which you may use, if you like.

  Soc. But I have no particular liking for anything but the truth. I
wish, however, that you would tell me what benefit accrues to the gods
from our gifts. There is no doubt about what they give to us; for
there is no good thing which they do not give; but how we can give any
good thing to them in return is far from being equally clear. If
they give everything and we give nothing, that must be an affair of
business in which we have very greatly the advantage of them.

  Euth. And do you imagine, Socrates, that any benefit accrues to
the gods from our gifts?

  Soc. But if not, Euthyphro, what is the meaning of gifts which are
conferred by us upon the gods?

  Euth. What else, but tributes of honour; and, as I was just now
saying, what pleases them?

  Soc. Piety, then, is pleasing to the gods, but not beneficial or
dear to them?

  Euth. I should say that nothing could be dearer.

  Soc. Then once more the assertion is repeated that piety is dear
to the gods?

  Euth. Certainly.

  Soc. And when you say this, can you wonder at your words not
standing firm, but walking away? Will you accuse me of being the
Daedalus who makes them walk away, not perceiving that there is
another and far greater artist than Daedalus who makes them go round
in a circle, and he is yourself; for the argument, as you will
perceive, comes round to the same point. Were we not saying that the
holy or pious was not the same with that which is loved of the gods?
Have you forgotten?

  Euth. I quite remember.

  Soc. And are you not saying that what is loved of the gods is
holy; and is not this the same as what is dear to them-do you see?

  Euth. True.

  Soc. Then either we were wrong in former assertion; or, if we were
right then, we are wrong now.

  Euth. One of the two must be true.

  Soc. Then we must begin again and ask, What is piety? That is an
enquiry which I shall never be weary of pursuing as far as in me lies;
and I entreat you not to scorn me, but to apply your mind to the
utmost, and tell me the truth. For, if any man knows, you are he;
and therefore I must detain you, like Proteus, until you tell. If
you had not certainly known the nature of piety and impiety, I am
confident that you would never, on behalf of a serf, have charged your
aged father with murder. You would not have run such a risk of doing
wrong in the sight of the gods, and you would have had too much
respect for the opinions of men. I am sure, therefore, that you know
the nature of piety and impiety. Speak out then, my dear Euthyphro,
and do not hide your knowledge.

  Euth. Another time, Socrates; for I am in a hurry, and must go now.

  Soc. Alas! my companion, and will you leave me in despair? I was
hoping that you would instruct me in the nature of piety and
impiety; and then I might have cleared myself of Meletus and his
indictment. I would have told him that I had been enlightened by
Euthyphro, and had given up rash innovations and speculations, in
which I indulged only through ignorance, and that now I am about to
lead a better life.

                             -THE END-



  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: CALLICLES; SOCRATES; CHAEREPHON; GORGIAS;
POLUS

  Scene: The house of Callicles.

  Callicles. The wise man, as the proverb says, is late for a fray,
but not for a feast.

  Socrates. And are we late for a feast?

  Cal. Yes, and a delightful feast; for Gorgias has just been
exhibiting to us many fine things.

  Soc. It is not my fault, Callicles; our friend Chaerephon is to
blame; for he would keep us loitering in the Agora.

  Chaerephon. Never mind, Socrates; the misfortune of which I have
been the cause I will also repair; for Gorgias is a friend of mine,
and I will make him give the exhibition again either now, or, if you
prefer, at some other time.

  Cal. What is the matter, Chaerephon-does Socrates want to hear
Gorgias?

  Chaer. Yes, that was our intention in coming.

  Cal. Come into my house, then; for Gorgias is staying with me, and
he shall exhibit to you.

  Soc. Very good, Callicles; but will he answer our questions? for I
want to hear from him what is the nature of his art, and what it is
which he professes and teaches; he may, as you [Chaerephon] suggest,
defer the exhibition to some other time.

  Cal. There is nothing like asking him, Socrates; and indeed to
answer questions is a part of his exhibition, for he was saying only
just now, that any one in my house might put any question to him,
and that he would answer.

  Soc. How fortunate! will you ask him, Chaerephon-?

  Chaer. What shall I ask him?

  Soc. Ask him who he is.

  Chaer. What do you mean?

  Soc. I mean such a question as would elicit from him, if he had been
a maker of shoes, the answer that he is a cobbler. Do you understand?

  Chaer. I understand, and will ask him: Tell me, Gorgias, is our
friend Callicles right in saying that you undertake to answer any
questions which you are asked?

  Gorgias. Quite right, Chaerephon: I was saying as much only just
now; and I may add, that many years have elapsed since any one has
asked me a new one.

  Chaer. Then you must be very ready, Gorgias.

  Gor. Of that, Chaerephon, you can make trial.

  Polus. Yes, indeed, and if you like, Chaerephon, you may make
trial of me too, for I think that Gorgias, who has been talking a long
time, is tired.

  Chaer. And do you, Polus, think that you can answer better than
Gorgias?

  Pol. What does that matter if I answer well enough for you?

  Chaer. Not at all:-and you shall answer if you like.

  Pol. Ask:-

  Chaer. My question is this: If Gorgias had the skill of his
brother Herodicus, what ought we to call him? Ought he not to have the
name which is given to his brother?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Chaer. Then we should be right in calling him a physician?

  Pol. Yes.

  Chaer. And if he had the skill of Aristophon the son of Aglaophon,
or of his brother Polygnotus, what ought we to call him?

  Pol. Clearly, a painter.

  Chaer. But now what shall we call him-what is the art in which he is
skilled.

  Pol. O Chaerephon, there are many arts among mankind which are
experimental, and have their origin in experience, for experience
makes the days of men to proceed according to art, and inexperience
according to chance, and different persons in different ways are
proficient in different arts, and the best persons in the best arts.
And our friend Gorgias is one of the best, and the art in which he
is a proficient is the noblest.

  Soc. Polus has been taught how to make a capital speech, Gorgias;
but he is not fulfilling the promise which he made to Chaerephon.

  Gor. What do you mean, Socrates?

  Soc. I mean that he has not exactly answered the question which he
was asked.

  Gor. Then why not ask him yourself?

  Soc. But I would much rather ask you, if you are disposed to answer:
for I see, from the few words which Polus has uttered, that he has
attended more to the art which is called rhetoric than to dialectic.

  Pol. What makes you say so, Socrates?

  Soc. Because, Polus, when Chaerephon asked you what was the art
which Gorgias knows, you praised it as if you were answering some
one who found fault with it, but you never said what the art was.

  Pol. Why, did I not say that it was the noblest of arts?

  Soc. Yes, indeed, but that was no answer to the question: nobody
asked what was the quality, but what was the nature, of the art, and
by what name we were to describe Gorgias. And I would still beg you
briefly and clearly, as you answered Chaerephon when he asked you at
first, to say what this art is, and what we ought to call Gorgias:
Or rather, Gorgias, let me turn to you, and ask the same question what
are we to call you, and what is the art which you profess?

  Gor. Rhetoric, Socrates, is my art.

  Soc. Then I am to call you a rhetorician?

  Gor. Yes, Socrates, and a good one too, if you would call me that
which, in Homeric language, "I boast myself to be."

  Soc. I should wish to do so.

  Gor. Then pray do.

  Soc. And are we to say that you are able to make other men
rhetoricians?

  Gor. Yes, that is exactly what I profess to make them, not only at
Athens, but in all places.

  Soc. And will you continue to ask and answer questions, Gorgias,
as we are at present doing and reserve for another occasion the longer
mode of speech which Polus was attempting? Will you keep your promise,
and answer shortly the questions which are asked of you?

  Gor. Some answers, Socrates, are of necessity longer; but I will
do my best to make them as short as possible; for a part of my
profession is that I can be as short as any one.

  Soc. That is what is wanted, Gorgias; exhibit the shorter method
now, and the longer one at some other time.

  Gor. Well, I will; and you will certainly say, that you never
heard a man use fewer words.

  Soc. Very good then; as you profess to be a rhetorician, and a maker
of rhetoricians, let me ask you, with what is rhetoric concerned: I
might ask with what is weaving concerned, and you would reply (would
you not?), with the making of garments?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. And music is concerned with the composition of melodies?

  Gor. It is.

  Soc. By Here, Gorgias, I admire the surpassing brevity of your
answers.

  Gor. Yes, Socrates, I do think myself good at that.

  Soc. I am glad to hear it; answer me in like manner about
rhetoric: with what is rhetoric concerned?

  Gor. With discourse.

  Soc. What sort of discourse, Gorgias?-such discourse as would
teach the sick under what treatment they might get well?

  Gor. No.

  Soc. Then rhetoric does not treat of all kinds of discourse?

  Gor. Certainly not.

  Soc. And yet rhetoric makes men able to speak?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. And to understand that about which they speak?

  Gor. Of course.

  Soc. But does not the art of medicine, which we were just now
mentioning, also make men able to understand and speak about the sick?

  Gor. Certainly.

  Soc. Then medicine also treats of discourse?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. Of discourse concerning diseases?

  Gor. Just so.

  Soc. And does not gymnastic also treat of discourse concerning the
good or evil condition of the body?

  Gor. Very true.

  Soc. And the same, Gorgias, is true of the other arts:-all of them
treat of discourse concerning the subjects with which they severally
have to do.

  Gor. Clearly.

  Soc. Then why, if you call rhetoric the art which treats of
discourse, and all the other arts treat of discourse, do you not
call them arts of rhetoric?

  Gor. Because, Socrates, the knowledge of the other arts has only
to do with some sort of external action, as of the hand; but there
is no such action of the hand in rhetoric which works and takes effect
only through the medium of discourse. And therefore I am justified
in saying that rhetoric treats of discourse.

  Soc. I am not sure whether I entirely understand you, but I dare say
I shall soon know better; please to answer me a question:-you would
allow that there are arts?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. As to the arts generally, they are for the most part
concerned with doing, and require little or no speaking; in
painting, and statuary, and many other arts, the work may proceed in
silence; and of such arts I suppose you would say that they do not
come within the province of rhetoric.

  Gor. You perfectly conceive my meaning, Socrates.

  Soc. But there are other arts which work wholly through the medium
of language, and require either no action or very little, as, for
example, the arts of arithmetic, of calculation, of geometry, and of
playing draughts; in some of these speech is pretty nearly
co-extensive with action, but in most of them the verbal element is
greater-they depend wholly on words for their efficacy and power:
and I take your meaning to be that rhetoric is an art of this latter
sort?

  Gor. Exactly.

  Soc. And yet I do not believe that you really mean to call any of
these arts rhetoric; although the precise expression which you used
was, that rhetoric is an art which works and takes effect only through
the medium of discourse; and an adversary who wished to be captious
might say, "And so, Gorgias, you call arithmetic rhetoric." But I do
not think that you really call arithmetic rhetoric any more than
geometry would be so called by you.

  Gor. You are quite right, Socrates, in your apprehension of my
meaning.

  Soc. Well, then, let me now have the rest of my answer:-seeing
that rhetoric is one of those arts which works mainly by the use of
words, and there are other arts which also use words, tell me what
is that quality in words with which rhetoric is concerned:-Suppose
that a person asks me about some of the arts which I was mentioning
just now; he might say, "Socrates, what is arithmetic?" and I should
reply to him, as you replied to me, that arithmetic is one of those
arts which take effect through words. And then he would proceed to
ask: "Words about what?" and I should reply, Words about and even
numbers, and how many there are of each. And if he asked again:
"What is the art of calculation?" I should say, That also is one of
the arts which is concerned wholly with words. And if he further said,
"Concerned with what?" I should say, like the clerks in the
assembly, "as aforesaid" of arithmetic, but with a difference, the
difference being that the art of calculation considers not only the
quantities of odd and even numbers, but also their numerical relations
to themselves and to one another. And suppose, again, I were to say
that astronomy is only word-he would ask, "Words about what,
Socrates?" and I should answer, that astronomy tells us about the
motions of the stars and sun and moon, and their relative swiftness.

  Gor. You would be quite right, Socrates.

  Soc. And now let us have from you, Gorgias, the truth about
rhetoric: which you would admit (would you not?) to be one of those
arts which act always and fulfil all their ends through the medium
of words?

  Gor. True.

  Soc. Words which do what? I should ask. To what class of things do
the words which rhetoric uses relate?

  Gor. To the greatest, Socrates, and the best of human things.

  Soc. That again, Gorgias is ambiguous; I am still in the dark: for
which are the greatest and best of human things? I dare say that you
have heard men singing at feasts the old drinking song, in which the
singers enumerate the goods of life, first health, beauty next,
thirdly, as the writer of the song says, wealth honesty obtained.

  Gor. Yes, I know the song; but what is your drift?

  Soc. I mean to say, that the producers of those things which the
author of the song praises, that is to say, the physician, the
trainer, the money-maker, will at once come to you, and first the
physician will say: "O Socrates, Gorgias is deceiving you, for my
art is concerned with the greatest good of men and not his." And
when I ask, Who are you? he will reply, "I am a physician." What do
you mean? I shall say. Do you mean that your art produces the greatest
good? "Certainly," he will answer, "for is not health the greatest
good? What greater good can men have, Socrates?" And after him the
trainer will come and say, "I too, Socrates, shall be greatly
surprised if Gorgias can show more good of his art than I can show
of mine." To him again I shall say, Who are you, honest friend, and
what is your business? "I am a trainer," he will reply, "and my
business is to make men beautiful and strong in body." When I have
done with the trainer, there arrives the money-maker, and he, as I
expect, utterly despise them all. "Consider Socrates," he will say,
"whether Gorgias or any one-else can produce any greater good than
wealth." Well, you and I say to him, and are you a creator of
wealth? "Yes," he replies. And who are you? "A money-maker." And do
you consider wealth to be the greatest good of man? "Of course,"
will be his reply. And we shall rejoin: Yes; but our friend Gorgias
contends that his art produces a greater good than yours. And then
he will be sure to go on and ask, "What good? Let Gorgias answer." Now
I want you, Gorgias, to imagine that this question is asked of you
by them and by me; What is that which, as you say, is the greatest
good of man, and of which you are the creator? Answer us.

  Gor. That good, Socrates, which is truly the greatest, being that
which gives to men freedom in their own persons, and to individuals
the power of ruling over others in their several states.

  Soc. And what would you consider this to be?

  Gor. What is there greater than the word which persuades the
judges in the courts, or the senators in the council, or the
citizens in the assembly, or at any other political meeting?-if you
have the power of uttering this word, you will have the physician your
slave, and the trainer your slave, and the money-maker of whom you
talk will be found to gather treasures, not for himself, but for you
who are able to speak and to persuade the multitude.

  Soc. Now I think, Gorgias, that you have very accurately explained
what you conceive to be the art of rhetoric; and you mean to say, if I
am not mistaken, that rhetoric is the artificer of persuasion,
having this and no other business, and that this is her crown and end.
Do you know any other effect of rhetoric over and above that of
producing persuasion?

  Gor. No: the definition seems to me very fair, Socrates; for
persuasion is the chief end of rhetoric.

  Soc. Then hear me, Gorgias, for I am quite sure that if there ever
was a man who-entered on the discussion of a matter from a pure love
of knowing the truth, I am such a one, and I should say the same of
you.

  Gor. What is coming, Socrates?

  Soc. I will tell you: I am very well aware that do not know what,
according to you, is the exact nature, or what are the topics of
that persuasion of which you speak, and which is given by rhetoric;
although I have a suspicion about both the one and the other. And I am
going to ask-what is this power of persuasion which is given by
rhetoric, and about what? But why, if I have a suspicion, do I ask
instead of telling you? Not for your sake, but in order that the
argument may proceed in such a manner as is most likely to set forth
the truth. And I would have you observe, that I am right in asking
